<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic
  PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="section_kct_1dv_fvb">
<title>Exchanging DITA documents</title>
<body>
			
			<p>One advantage of using DITA is that we can tag at semantic level. For this to work,
				we need to create a specialization that reflects exactly the concepts the users of
				that specialization are familiar with. If one tries to layer its actual needs over
				an existing specialization - or one of the standard schemas - these may not match
				exactly the concepts of the audience and thus it will look like DITA is not the best
				fit.</p>
			<p>But the problem with a specialization is how do we exchange it with other parties? We
				need to provide them also our specialization, and if they do not have our
				specialization, then what happens?</p>
			<p>One approach will be to export the DITA content as generalized content. Then import
				such a generalized package into an existing DITA installation by specializing as
				much as possible taking into account what is available on the target DITA
				installation.</p>
			<p>How can this be achieved?</p>
			<p>From the class of the root element we can identify the possible specialized root
				elements and check if we have them defined in a schema in the target DITA
				installation. Once we choose a root element then we need to analyze the domain
				attributes of the root element and see what domains are defined in the target topic
				type and then specialize elements from those domains back, otherwise, if a domain is
				not present in the target schema we need to leave the base element.</p>
			<p>We have support for generalization - and that is relatively easy to implement - and
				we can probably obtain also the export package in a generalized form. We are missing
				however a tool to take a generalized package, analyze a current DITA installation
				and specialize everything so that it matches what is available in that specific DITA
				installation.</p>
		</body>
</topic>