<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE task PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Task//EN" "task.dtd">
<task id="convert_code_templates_to_author_actions">
    <title>Convert code templates to external author actions</title>
    <shortdesc>How to bring code templates into a framework as author actions.</shortdesc>
    <prolog>
        <author>Alex Jitianu</author>
        <critdates>
            <created date="2021-05-26"/>
        </critdates>
    </prolog>
    <taskbody>
        <context>Code templates are code fragments that can be inserted quickly at the current
            editing position. <xref
                href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/the-action-dialog.html#the-action-dialog"
                format="html" scope="external">Author actions</xref>, available in the Author mode,
            offer a lot more flexibility, for example you can decide what fragment to insert based
            on the current context. If you want to create a new framework or <xref
                href="topics/customizing_a_document_type_using_an_extension_framework_script.dita"
                >customize an existing framework</xref> then it makes sense to convert code
            templates to author actions. We will then contribute them to the content completion
            window. We will define the framework using a <xref
                href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/framework-customization-script-usecases.html"
                format="html" scope="external">Framework extension script</xref>.</context>
        <steps>
            <step>
                <cmd>Create a framework or extend an existing framework using a <xref
                        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/framework-customization-script-usecases.html"
                        format="html" scope="external">Framework extension script</xref>.</cmd>
            </step>
            <step>
                <cmd>Go to <menucascade>
                        <uicontrol>Options</uicontrol>
                        <uicontrol>Preferences...</uicontrol>
                    </menucascade> ] on page <uicontrol>Code Templates</uicontrol> and <xref
                        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/preferences-editor-code-templates.html#preferences-editor-code-templates__dlentry_omp_bgk_54b"
                        format="html" scope="external">Export</xref> the code templates to a file
                    called <filepath>code-templates.xml</filepath>.</cmd>
            </step>
            <step>
                <cmd> Create an XSLT file with the following content: </cmd>
                <info>
                    <codeblock id="codeblock_agm_k3x_spb" outputclass="language-xml">&lt;?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
&lt;xsl:stylesheet xmlns:xsl="http://www.w3.org/1999/XSL/Transform"
    xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema"
    exclude-result-prefixes="xs"
    version="3.0">
    &lt;xsl:output method="xml"/>
    &lt;xsl:template match="//codeTemplateItem[field[@name='contentType']/String/text() = 'text/xml']">
        &lt;xsl:variable name="actionName" select="field[@name='renderString']/String/text()"/>
        &lt;xsl:result-document href="externalAuthorActions/{$actionName}.xml">
            &lt;a:authorAction xmlns:a="http://www.oxygenxml.com/ns/author/external-action"
                xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
                xsi:schemaLocation="http://www.oxygenxml.com/ns/author/external-action http://www.oxygenxml.com/ns/author/external-action/authorAction.xsd"
                id="{$actionName}">
                &lt;a:name>&lt;xsl:value-of select="$actionName"/>&lt;/a:name>
                &lt;a:description>&lt;xsl:value-of select="field[@name='descriptionString']/String/text()"/>&lt;/a:description>
                &lt;a:operations>
                    &lt;a:operation id="InsertFragmentOperation">
                        &lt;a:xpathCondition>true()&lt;/a:xpathCondition>
                        &lt;a:arguments>
                            &lt;a:argument name="fragment">
                                &lt;!-- Try parsing the fragment. if it succeeds, we basically unwrap it from the CDATA. -->
                                &lt;xsl:try
                                    select="parse-xml-fragment(field[@name='unparsedInsertString']/String/text())">
                                    &lt;xsl:catch>
                                        &lt;!-- Parsing failed. It might have unresolved entities. Keep it in a CDATA. -->
                                        &lt;xsl:text disable-output-escaping="yes">&amp;lt;![CDATA[&lt;/xsl:text>
                                        &lt;xsl:value-of disable-output-escaping="true" select="field[@name='unparsedInsertString']/String/text()" >&lt;/xsl:value-of>
                                        &lt;xsl:text disable-output-escaping="yes">]]&amp;gt;&lt;/xsl:text>
                                    &lt;/xsl:catch>
                                &lt;/xsl:try>
                            &lt;/a:argument>
                        &lt;/a:arguments>
                    &lt;/a:operation>
                &lt;/a:operations>
                &lt;a:accessKey/>
            &lt;/a:authorAction>
        &lt;/xsl:result-document>
    &lt;/xsl:template>
    
    &lt;xsl:template match="text()"/>
&lt;/xsl:stylesheet></codeblock>
                </info>
            </step>
            <step>
                <cmd>Create an <xref
                        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/xslt-transformation.html"
                        format="html" scope="external">XSLT Transformation scenario</xref> and apply
                    the XSLT over the <filepath>code-templates.xml</filepath> file.</cmd>
            </step>
            <step>
                <cmd>Go to the directory of <filepath>code-templates.xml</filepath> and copy the
                    generated <filepath>externalAuthorActions</filepath> to the framework directory,
                    the directory with the framework extension script.</cmd>
            </step>
            <step>
                <cmd>Create another XSLT with following content, create an <xref
                        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/xslt-transformation.html"
                        format="html" scope="external">XSLT Transformation scenario</xref> and apply
                    it over the <filepath>code-templates.xml</filepath> file.</cmd>
                <info>
                    <codeblock id="codeblock_x4h_hnx_spb" outputclass="language-xml">&lt;?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
&lt;xsl:stylesheet xmlns:xsl="http://www.w3.org/1999/XSL/Transform"
    xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema"
    exclude-result-prefixes="xs"
    version="3.0">
    &lt;xsl:output method="xml" omit-xml-declaration="yes" indent="true">&lt;/xsl:output>
    &lt;xsl:output method="xml"/>
    &lt;xsl:template match="/">
        &lt;contentCompletion>
            &lt;authorActions>
                &lt;xsl:apply-templates/>
            &lt;/authorActions>
        &lt;/contentCompletion>
    &lt;/xsl:template>
    &lt;xsl:template match="//codeTemplateItem[field[@name='contentType']/String/text() = 'text/xml']">
        &lt;xsl:variable name="actionName" select="field[@name='renderString']/String/text()"/>
        
        &lt;addAction id="{$actionName}" inCCWindow="true"/> 
    &lt;/xsl:template>
    
    &lt;xsl:template match="text()"/>
&lt;/xsl:stylesheet></codeblock>
                </info>
            </step>
            <step>
                <cmd>Copy the resulting <xmlelement>contentCompletion</xmlelement> into the <xref
                        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/framework-customization-script-usecases.html"
                        format="html" scope="external">Framework extension script</xref> root
                    element.</cmd>
            </step>
        </steps>
        <result id="result_ult_mnx_spb">There's a new <xref
                href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/dg-create-custom-actions.html#dg-create-custom-actions__section_2"
                format="html" scope="external">external author action</xref> for each initial code
            template. All actions are contributed to the <xref
                href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/framework-customization-script-usecases.html#framework-customization-script-usecases__section_cgh_yzm_knb"
                format="html" scope="external">content completion window</xref>.</result>
    </taskbody>
</task>
