<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><?workdir /D:\syncprojects\blog\temp\webhelp-responsive\topics?><?workdir-uri file:/D:/syncprojects/blog/temp/webhelp-responsive/topics/?><?path2project ..\?><?path2project-uri ../?><?path2rootmap-uri ../?><?doctype-public -//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN?><?doctype-system topic.dtd?><topic xmlns:dita-ot="http://dita-ot.sourceforge.net/ns/201007/dita-ot" xmlns:ditaarch="http://dita.oasis-open.org/architecture/2005/" id="topic_elm_qn3_sr" ditaarch:DITAArchVersion="1.3" domains="(topic abbrev-d) a(props deliveryTarget) (topic equation-d) (topic hazard-d) (topic hi-d) (topic indexing-d) (topic markup-d) (topic mathml-d) (topic pr-d) (topic relmgmt-d) (topic sw-d) (topic svg-d) (topic ui-d) (topic ut-d) (topic markup-d xml-d)" class="- topic/topic " xtrf="file:/D:/syncprojects/blog/topics/greattechsupport.dita" xtrc="topic:1;3:30" specializations="@props/deliveryTarget">
  <title class="- topic/title " xtrf="file:/D:/syncprojects/blog/topics/greattechsupport.dita" xtrc="title:1;4:10">A set of rules for providing great tech support</title>
  <prolog class="- topic/prolog " xtrf="file:/D:/syncprojects/blog/topics/greattechsupport.dita" xtrc="prolog:1;5:11">
    <author class="- topic/author " xtrf="file:/D:/syncprojects/blog/topics/greattechsupport.dita" xtrc="author:1;6:13">Radu Coravu</author>
  </prolog>
  <body class="- topic/body " xtrf="file:/D:/syncprojects/blog/topics/greattechsupport.dita" xtrc="body:1;8:9">
    <p class="- topic/p " xtrf="file:/D:/syncprojects/blog/topics/greattechsupport.dita" xtrc="p:1;9:8">I've been doing technical support for more than 10 years and I feel that I've gathered a few
      ideas about what <b class="+ topic/ph hi-d/b " xtrf="file:/D:/syncprojects/blog/topics/greattechsupport.dita" xtrc="b:1;10:27">great</b> tech support would be. And doing tech support the right way can
      be great both for product users and for the product developer as it provides lots of
      opportunities to further enhance and steer the application.</p>
    <p class="- topic/p " xtrf="file:/D:/syncprojects/blog/topics/greattechsupport.dita" xtrc="p:2;13:8">
      <ol class="- topic/ol " xtrf="file:/D:/syncprojects/blog/topics/greattechsupport.dita" xtrc="ol:1;14:11">
        <li class="- topic/li " xtrf="file:/D:/syncprojects/blog/topics/greattechsupport.dita" xtrc="li:1;15:13">Never say <b class="+ topic/ph hi-d/b " xtrf="file:/D:/syncprojects/blog/topics/greattechsupport.dita" xtrc="b:2;15:26">never</b>. Never assume for certain that a feature request will not get
          implemented. Just register it and wait for feedback from others. I've had so many cases in
          which requests which initially seemed not worthy of implementation became important
          features in later versions.</li>
        <li class="- topic/li " xtrf="file:/D:/syncprojects/blog/topics/greattechsupport.dita" xtrc="li:2;19:13">When asked for a solution to a specific problem, give the solution but also provide a
          sequence of deductive steps you took in order to find the solution. So give them the fish
          but also discuss about how they can fish for themselves. Help people evolve and you will
          have less tech support to do.</li>
        <li class="- topic/li " xtrf="file:/D:/syncprojects/blog/topics/greattechsupport.dita" xtrc="li:3;23:13">Try to steer conversations as much as possible from private emails to forums and public
          user lists. These become repositories of knowledge and you'll avoid explaining the same
          thing multiple times if there is already a place on the web explaining it.</li>
        <li class="- topic/li " xtrf="file:/D:/syncprojects/blog/topics/greattechsupport.dita" xtrc="li:4;26:13">In order to avoid answering the same question multiple times you have the following
          constructive options:<ul id="ul_hbj_tw3_sr" class="- topic/ul " xtrf="file:/D:/syncprojects/blog/topics/greattechsupport.dita" xtrc="ul:1;27:55">
            <li class="- topic/li " xtrf="file:/D:/syncprojects/blog/topics/greattechsupport.dita" xtrc="li:5;28:17">Add a topic in the product's User's Manual explaining the problem</li>
            <li class="- topic/li " xtrf="file:/D:/syncprojects/blog/topics/greattechsupport.dita" xtrc="li:6;29:17">Improve the product so that it becomes easier to perform those particular
              tasks.</li>
          </ul></li>
        <li class="- topic/li " xtrf="file:/D:/syncprojects/blog/topics/greattechsupport.dita" xtrc="li:7;32:13">Some of our users know more and work more with certain aspects of the application than
          we do. So when certain work-flows are not appropriate for them, it's important that you
          listen and possibly change the application accordingly.</li>
        <li class="- topic/li " xtrf="file:/D:/syncprojects/blog/topics/greattechsupport.dita" xtrc="li:8;35:13">Whenever an older behavior is changed in the application, even if you consider that the
          change is for the better, you will get complaints. And you will need to decide if users
          just need a time to adjust to the changes or if you've taken the application in the wrong
          direction.</li>
        <li class="- topic/li " xtrf="file:/D:/syncprojects/blog/topics/greattechsupport.dita" xtrc="li:9;39:13">You may get asked questions which are not particularly related to what the application
          does. But you might still be able to give your personal opinion and a few useful links to
          get your client moving in the right direction.</li>
        <li class="- topic/li " xtrf="file:/D:/syncprojects/blog/topics/greattechsupport.dita" xtrc="li:10;42:13">You will gain access to various user samples and work with the application to reproduce
          certain problems. Various times while working with the application to reproduce a problem
          you will also notice other behaviors which can be improved as well. Contribute all those
          side-effect suggestions to your issues list as well.</li>
        <li class="- topic/li " xtrf="file:/D:/syncprojects/blog/topics/greattechsupport.dita" xtrc="li:11;46:13">Make it as easy as possible for people to report problems or to ask questions about the
          product. For example in Oxygen in the Help menu we have a "Report Problem" action which
          can be used to quickly report to us any issue which may arise while using the
          application.</li>
        <li class="- topic/li " xtrf="file:/D:/syncprojects/blog/topics/greattechsupport.dita" xtrc="li:12;50:13">Always try to provide a feasible workaround for a bug or for a lack of
          functionality.</li>
      </ol>
    </p>
    <p class="- topic/p " xtrf="file:/D:/syncprojects/blog/topics/greattechsupport.dita" xtrc="p:3;54:8">If you have more ideas about this, please share them with me.</p>
  </body>
</topic>