<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept id="_10_things_i_enjoy_about_the_new_oxygen_json_editor">
    <title>10 Things I Enjoy About the New Oxygen JSON Editor</title>
    <prolog>
        <author>Radu Coravu</author>
        <critdates>
            <created date="2024-01-17"/>
        </critdates>
    </prolog>
    <conbody>
        <p>We released the <xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/oxygen_json_editor.html"
                format="html" scope="external">Oxygen JSON Editor</xref> a couple of months ago as a
            practical tool for web developers and people interested in general in editing,
            validating, or converting JSON documents.</p>
        <p>In this article, I will list some of the features of Oxygen JSON Editor that I enjoy the
                most:<ul id="ul_mtr_zyb_d1c">
                <li>Value for money. The 12 months subscription license is <xref
                        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/json_editor/buy.html" format="html"
                        scope="external">less than 100 USD</xref> per year and always gives you
                    access to the latest JSON Editor released version.</li>
                <li>Support to create JSON Schemas and to use JSON Schemas to validate JSON
                    instances. There is a great <b id="b_zgq_pbc_d1c">JSON Schema</b> diagram editor
                    that can be used to visually compose JSON schema files. I used this support
                    quite a lot when creating JSON configuration files for the Oxygen <b
                        id="b_kvk_11c_d1c">AI Positron Assistant</b> add-on.</li>
                <li>Built on top of the Oxygen application platform, the JSON Editor offers the
                    regular Oxygen facilities: <ul id="ul_ngk_whw_d1c">
                        <li>Multi platform application (Windows, Mac, Linux).</li>
                        <li>Project view.</li>
                        <li>Find Replace capabilities.</li>
                        <li>and much more....</li>
                    </ul></li>
                <li>As another neat feature of being an Oxygen application, in the Oxygen JSON
                    Editor, you can install useful free add-ons like the <xref
                        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-addons/topics/git-addon.html"
                        format="html" scope="external">Git client-add on</xref>, <b
                        id="b_fvz_y1c_d1c">Batch Documents Converter</b>, or the <xref
                            href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-addons/topics/xsd-to-json-schema-converter-x2.html"
                        format="html" scope="external">JSON Schema Documentation generator
                        add-on</xref>.</li>
                <li>All the nifty conversion tools (<b id="b_ehv_k1c_d1c">JSON to YAML</b>, <b
                        id="b_vvx_k1c_d1c">YAML to JSON</b>, <b id="b_pw1_l1c_d1c">XML to JSON</b>)
                    allow you to change between representations in various formats of the same data.
                    For my work, I used, for example, the<b id="b_bqq_k1c_d1c"> XML to JSON</b>
                    converter to convert a piece of HTML content representing an unordered list to a
                    JSON object that I further proceeded to load from JavaScript.</li>
                <li>When editing a JSON file, the <b id="b_tw4_d1c_d1c">Author</b> visual editing
                    mode allows me to add new lines in values by pressing ENTER, new lines that are
                    escaped automatically to <codeph>\n</codeph> when switching to the Text editing
                    mode.</li>
                <li>You can run <b id="b_ivr_mbc_d1c">XPath</b> expressions over opened JSON
                    documents using the <b id="b_zsl_mbc_d1c">XPath</b> toolbar.</li>
                <li>You can edit much <b id="b_l3p_n1c_d1c">more</b> than JSON documents. This is a
                    web developer editor in disguise, allowing you to edit <b id="b_u42_gcc_d1c"
                        >Markdown</b>, <b id="b_gb3_r1c_d1c">HTML</b>, <b id="b_kgl_r1c_d1c"
                    >CSS</b>, <b id="b_sjt_r1c_d1c">Javascript</b>, <b id="b_tlz_r1c_d1c">YAML</b>,
                    and of course <b id="b_ntf_s1c_d1c">JSON</b>.</li>
                <li>Support to create, edit, and convert <b id="b_kvt_v1c_d1c">OpenAPI</b>
                    specification documents either in <b id="b_fwd_w1c_d1c">JSON</b> or <b
                        id="b_xt3_w1c_d1c">YAML</b> format.</li>
                <li>The <b id="b_wqb_fbc_d1c">Tools</b> menu's <b id="b_vpx_fbc_d1c">Compare</b>
                    utilities allow you to compare a large variety of file formats either file per
                    file or by comparing entire folders.</li>
            </ul></p>
        <p>I consider this tool to be an excellent purchase for developers to edit configuration
            files in <b id="b_exq_jdc_d1c">JSON</b> or <b id="b_od4_jdc_d1c">Yaml</b>, validate
            configuration files, perform conversions, even for writing small Markdown documentation
            topics.</p>
    </conbody>
</concept>
