<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="adding_cals_table_related_functionality_to_your_custom_oxygen_framework">
    <title>Adding CALS-table related functionality to your custom Oxygen framework</title>
    <prolog>
        <author>Mihaela Calotescu</author>
    </prolog>
    <body>
        <p>Oxygen comes with full support for <b>CALS</b> tables in <b>DITA</b> and <b>Docbook</b>
            documents, meaning that you can easily make selections, resize columns, and invoke
            special actions like insert or delete rows and columns, join, or split cells. You can
            also easily customize tables properties such as alignments, separators, and table
            borders. But what if you are editing documents from other vocabularies, containing
            tables with <b>CALS</b> structure? What you can do to obtain the same table editing
            features?</p>
        <p>Let's suppose that you already created an Oxygen framework for your documents vocabulary
            (if you need further information about frameworks, see <xref
                href="http://blog.oxygenxml.com/2014/08/the-oxygen-sdk-part-2-frameworks.html"
                format="html" scope="external"
                >http://blog.oxygenxml.com/2014/08/the-oxygen-sdk-part-2-frameworks.html</xref>).
            What we want to obtain next is to extract all the CALS tables related support from
                <b>Docbook</b> framework and add it to your custom framework. Why <b>Docbook</b> and
            not <b>DITA</b> as reference? Because the <b>DITA</b> customization is based on the
            "class" attribute checking while the <b>Docbook</b> one is more general (element-name
            oriented).</p>
        <ol id="ol_mkm_3cy_mlb">
            <li><b>Table rendering</b><ol id="ol_nkm_3cy_mlb">
                    <li>copy
                            <systemoutput>[oXygen_install_dir]\frameworks\docbook\css\cals_table.css</systemoutput>
                        in your framework css directory</li>
                    <li> in the <systemoutput>Document Type</systemoutput> edit dialog,
                            <systemoutput>Author</systemoutput> tab,
                            <systemoutput>CSS</systemoutput> sub-tab, add the
                            <systemoutput>${framework}/css/cals_table.css</systemoutput> entry to
                        the list of the CSSs </li>
                </ol><p>In this way the table will be rendered properly in Author mode and the
                    following features will be available: </p><ul id="ul_okm_3cy_mlb">
                    <li>select cells (<systemoutput>CTRL+click</systemoutput>), rows (click before
                        the row), columns (click on top of the row), tables (click in the left-up
                        corner of the table)</li>
                    <li>resize table column</li>
                </ul></li>
            <li><b>Create table actions</b><p>Here are the table-related actions implemented in
                    Docbook that you can implement also in you framework:</p><ul id="ul_pkm_3cy_mlb">
                    <li>Expand colspecs</li>
                    <li>Insert/Delete Rows</li>
                    <li>Insert/Delete Columns</li>
                    <li>Table Properties</li>
                    <li>Join cells</li>
                    <li>Split cell</li>
                </ul><ol id="ol_qkm_3cy_mlb">
                    <li>Copy<systemoutput>
                            [oXygen_installation_dir]\frameworks\docbook\docbook.jar</systemoutput>
                        in your framework directory (this jar contains all the table operations
                        classes needed to create table actions). In <systemoutput>Document
                            type</systemoutput> edit dialog go to
                            <systemoutput>Classpath</systemoutput> tab and add the docbook.jar from
                        your framework directory to the list of paths. In this way you have access
                        to all table operations from your framework.</li>
                    <li> For every table action you have to define a corresponding action in the
                            <systemoutput>Document type</systemoutput> configuration dialog. Here
                        are the details: <xref
                            href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/versions/17.1/ug-editor/#topics/the-action-dialog.html"
                            format="html" scope="external"
                            >https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/versions/17.1/ug-editor/#topics/the-action-dialog.html</xref>.
                        You can look at the corresponding Docbook action to see the properties (id,
                        name, icons, the conditions that enables it, the specific operation for CALS
                        tables). <p>Once you created these actions you can add them to the UI.
                        </p></li>
                </ol></li>
            <li><b>Add table actions to menu, toolbar and contextual menu</b><ol id="ol_rkm_3cy_mlb">
                    <li>To add an action to the menu go to <systemoutput>Document
                            Type</systemoutput> configuration dialog,
                            <systemoutput>Author</systemoutput> tab,
                            <systemoutput>Menu</systemoutput> sub-tab, select the action from
                            <systemoutput>Available actions</systemoutput> section and add it to the
                            <systemoutput>Current action</systemoutput> section.</li>
                    <li> To add an action to the contextual menu go to <systemoutput>Document
                            Type</systemoutput> configuration dialog,
                            <systemoutput>Author</systemoutput> tab, <systemoutput>Contextual
                            menu</systemoutput> sub-tab, select the action from
                            <systemoutput>Available actions</systemoutput> section and add it to the
                            <systemoutput>Current action</systemoutput> section. </li>
                    <li> To add an action to the toolbar go to <systemoutput>Document
                            Type</systemoutput> configuration dialog,
                            <systemoutput>Author</systemoutput> tab,
                            <systemoutput>Toolbar</systemoutput> sub-tab, select the action from
                            <systemoutput>Available actions</systemoutput> section and add it to the
                            <systemoutput>Current action</systemoutput> section. </li>
                </ol></li>
        </ol>
        <p>If all goes well, your custom framework which uses the standard CALS table naming
            mechanism will properly handle tables, both for display and for table-related
            operations.</p>
    </body>
</topic>
