<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="adding_labels_to_topics_in_the_webhelp_responsive_output">
    <title>Adding Labels to Topics in the WebHelp Responsive Output</title>
    <prolog>
        <author>Radu Coravu</author>
        <critdates>
            <created date="2021-12-13"/>
        </critdates>
        <metadata>
            <keywords>
                <keyword outputclass="label">DITA Publishing Customization</keyword>
            </keywords>
        </metadata>
    </prolog>
    <body>
        <p>DITA topics can contain <xmlelement>keyword</xmlelement> elements that are usually placed
            in a <xmlelement>prolog</xmlelement> element, but they can also be used inside the topic
            body contents.
            <codeblock id="codeblock_t1c_yq1_xrb" outputclass="language-xml">&lt;topic id="topicID">
    &lt;title>DITA 1.3 Features&lt;/title>
    &lt;prolog>
        &lt;metadata>
            &lt;keywords>
                &lt;keyword>DITA 1.3&lt;/keyword>
            &lt;/keywords>
        &lt;/metadata>
    &lt;/prolog>...</codeblock>The Oxygen WebHelp Responsive output uses these keywords
            as a way of giving more priority to certain sequences of words when searching for
            content. By default, keywords do not appear in the published output.</p>
        <p>This article is an attempt to add a new concept of a <uicontrol>label</uicontrol>:<ul
                id="ul_bfg_3cx_xrb">
                <li>A <uicontrol>label</uicontrol> is a <uicontrol>keyword</uicontrol> element with
                    a special <xmlatt>outputclass="label"</xmlatt> attribute. The label is always
                    visible in the published output. It can be placed either in a prolog section or
                    anywhere inside the topic where a keyword is allowed.</li>
                <li>When a label is selected, the WebHelp output displays all other topics that have
                    the same <uicontrol>label</uicontrol> value set to them.</li>
            </ul></p>
        <section id="section_omd_ds1_xrb">
            <title>Inserting Labels</title>
            <p>We can decide to use the DITA <xmlelement>keyword</xmlelement> element with a certain
                    <xmlatt>outputclass</xmlatt> attribute value set to <codeph>label</codeph> to
                insert such keywords that should be displayed in the published
                output.<codeblock outputclass="language-xml" id="codeblock_wyg_js1_xrb">&lt;topic id="topicID">
    &lt;title>DITA 1.3 Features&lt;/title>
    &lt;prolog>
        &lt;metadata>
            &lt;keywords>
                &lt;keyword outputclass="label">DITA 1.3&lt;/keyword>
            &lt;/keywords>
        &lt;/metadata>
    &lt;/prolog>...</codeblock></p>
            <p>To make the insertion of such labels easier, you can, for example, create a custom
                Author action that inserts the labels and add the custom action to the content
                completion window: <xref href="custom-author-action-content-completion.dita"/>.</p>
            <p>To have special styling for the inserted labels when editing, you can customize the
                CSS stylesheets used for DITA editing: <xref href="customizeDITACSS.dita"/>.</p>
        </section>
        <section id="section_fvs_4s1_xrb">
            <title>Factoring Labels When Publishing</title>
            <p>The <xref
                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-webhelp-responsive/topics/wh-labels.html"
                    format="html" scope="external">WebHelp publishing</xref> by default creates
                visual labels in the published output.</p>
        </section>
    </body>
</topic>
