<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
  <topic id="ai-assisted-framework-development">
    <title>AI-Assisted Framework Development for Oxygen Web Author</title>
        <prolog>
        <author>Mircea Bina</author>
        <critdates>
            <created date="2026-06-22"/>
        </critdates>
    </prolog>
    <body>
      <p>Customizing Oxygen Web Author through a framework is powerful: you can <b>reshape the user
                interface</b>, <b>define document templates</b>, <b>extend DITA</b>, or add entirely
            new functionality. </p>
      <p>We asked: <q>What if an AI assistant could understand the Web Author documentation,
                generate framework customizations, and verify that they actually work?</q></p>
      <p>To find out, we built a collection of <b>AI Skills</b> that combine the official
            documentation, practical examples, and an automated development workflow. Given a
            plain-language request such as <q>create a document template for this use case</q>,
            <q>add a custom toolbar action</q>, <q>change the editor styling</q>, or <q>create a
            DITA extension</q>, the assistant can:</p>
      <ul>
        <li>Answer questions using the official documentation.</li>
        <li>Recommend the appropriate extension points for the customization.</li>
        <li>Generate the framework code and configuration.</li>
        <li>Launch Web Author in a real browser.</li>
        <li>Test the customization visually using Chrome DevTools MCP.</li>
        <li>Fix issues and iterate until the implementation works.</li>
      </ul>
      <p>What makes this possible is that the documentation was already prepared for AI integration.
            Starting with Oxygen XML WebHelp 28, the same DITA source can be published in an
            AI-friendly format: an <filepath>llms.txt</filepath> index alongside Markdown versions of
            every topic. That single output serves human readers and AI assistants alike, so the
            skills draw on the exact same documentation we ship to everyone else, with no separate
            set to maintain.</p>
        <note id="note_eg4_bf5_pjc" type="tip">For details on the AI-friendly format, see <xref
                href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-webhelp-responsive/topics/whr-ai-friendly-output.html"
                format="html" scope="external">AI-friendly output</xref> in the Oxygen XML WebHelp
            documentation.</note>
      <p>In the rest of this article, we'll look at how these AI Skills are put together, then walk
            through several framework customizations: a document template, a custom toolbar action,
            an editor styling change, and a DITA extension (that were created entirely through
            natural language prompts)</p>
      <section>
        <title>References</title>
        <ul>
          <li><xref
                        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-webhelp-responsive/topics/whr-ai-friendly-output.html"
                        format="html" scope="external">AI-friendly output (Oxygen
                    WebHelp)</xref></li>
        </ul>
      </section>
    </body>
  </topic>
