<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="ai-positron-assistant-retrospective-analysis">
    <title>AI Positron Assistant - Retrospective Analysis</title>
    <prolog>
        <author>Radu Coravu</author>
        <critdates>
            <created date="2024-11-05"/>
        </critdates>
    </prolog>
    <body>
        <p>It's been more than two years since we started working on the <xref
                href="ai_positron.dita"/>, back when the <uicontrol>OpenAI GPT 3.5</uicontrol> AI
            engine was released and we are currently on version 4.0.0 of the add-on. Our main
            direction (which we still keep) was to provide powerful tools based on AI engines for
            technical documentation writers (targeted mostly towards DITA XML users) and for our
            XSLT/Schematron developers. I've always envisioned the AI set of tools as an
            exoskeleton, as a way to add more power to a technical documentation writer's punch
            throughout the day. The table below contains a list of concepts (mostly add-on specific
            features or feature categories), each with a short description based on personal
            experience.</p>
        <p>
            <table frame="all" id="table_nlk_b1c_fdc" rowheader="firstcol" colsep="1" rowsep="1">
                <tgroup cols="2">
                    <colspec colname="c1" colnum="1" colwidth="1*" align="left"/>
                    <colspec colname="c2" colnum="2" colwidth="3.14*"/>
                    <tbody>
                        <row>
                            <entry>Eating our own dog food?</entry>
                            <entry>Are we using AI tools ourselves? Yes, I have started using AI
                                tools more and more to improve readability and fix grammar or
                                logical inconsistencies in articles like this one. I don't ask the
                                AI to create new article ideas, but I do use AI tools to make the
                                content I write easier to read. If I had lots of time to work on a
                                new blog post article idea, I might not need AI tools, but
                                unfortunately like many of you, I don't.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row>
                            <entry>Usefulness</entry>
                            <entry>Are AI engines useful for a technical writer's work? Definitely
                                yes. People might think they can just send the AI a bunch of content
                                with a simple instruction like <codeph>Spell check this
                                    content</codeph> and the AI will always return the correct
                                content. The AI engine gives meaningful answers when the prompt is
                                detailed and precise. This is why we include many predefined actions
                                with our add-on.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row>
                            <entry>Platform availability</entry>
                            <entry>From the start, we wanted the add-on to work for both the desktop
                                Oxygen application and the WebAuthor in-browser editor. We included
                                core features like predefined actions, chat support, and the ability
                                to create custom actions. This way, we can offer most of these
                                features on both the desktop and the web application.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row>
                            <entry>AI engine choice flexibility</entry>
                            <entry>
                                <p>Our initial offer was a <b>subscription</b>-based license using
                                    the Oxygen AI Positron Platform as a bridge to OpenAI. We
                                    noticed that some companies wanted a choice of which AI engine
                                    to use, so we created the <uicontrol>Oxygen AI Positron
                                        Enterprise</uicontrol> add-on. This add-on allows companies
                                    to use their own AI engine directly, with support for connectors
                                    to <b>OpenAI</b>, <b>Microsoft Azure OpenAI</b>, and
                                        <b>Anthropic Claude</b>. There are also proxy servers that
                                    can wrap many AI engines like <b>LLama</b> and <b>Mistral</b>,
                                    allowing them to be accessed using the OpenAI interface. Is the
                                    current flexibility we offer enough? Not in all cases. We plan
                                    to allow developers to create their own connectors to use their
                                    own APIs to access the engines.</p>
                                <p>So are all AI engines equal? Our predefined actions have and are
                                    actively tested with <b>OpenAI</b> engines and with engines
                                    provided by <b>Anthropic Claude</b>. We also tried to use
                                    engines like <b>Llama 3.1</b> or <b>Mistral</b> with our current
                                    predefined actions but the results are not fantastic, the
                                    possibility to obtain broken <b>DITA XML</b> content with these
                                    open source engines is much higher.</p>
                            </entry>
                        </row>
                        <row>
                            <entry>Predefined actions</entry>
                            <entry>Over time, we improved how we write prompts for the many <xref
                                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/ai_positron.html#ai_positron__section_z5l_qbx_jbc"
                                    format="html" scope="external">predefined actions</xref> that
                                come with the add-on. For each action, we try to give a clear prompt
                                with lots of details so the AI engine can produce the best results.
                                We test our predefined actions using both manual and automatic
                                tests. We got the best results with Open AI GPT-4 engines and the
                                engines provided by <b>Anthropic Claude</b> like
                                <b>Sonnet</b>.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row>
                            <entry>Custom actions</entry>
                            <entry>We wanted to give companies the flexibility to create their own
                                    <xref
                                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/ai_positron.html#ai_positron__section_rly_wp4_wxb"
                                    format="html" scope="external">custom actions</xref> using
                                specific prompts to solve their unique problems. With the add-on, we
                                provide a <b>JSON</b> schema that defines all aspects of
                                implementing custom AI actions. The key to a successful action is to
                                make it as precise and detailed as possible.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row>
                            <entry>Content generation</entry>
                            <entry>
                                <p>There are two main ways AI based content generation can be
                                    useful:</p>
                                <ul id="ul_njw_gbs_fdc">
                                    <li>Summarizing a large amount of text. For example predefined
                                        actions like <uicontrol>Short Description</uicontrol> try to
                                        summarize a big piece of content. These actions usually work
                                        very well.</li>
                                    <li>Expanding a small amount of text. Content generation actions
                                        like <uicontrol>Add Structured Content</uicontrol> or
                                            <uicontrol>Generate Documentation Draft</uicontrol> use
                                        the AI engine to expand existing content and create valid
                                        DITA XML content. Since AI engines can make mistakes if they
                                        don't have enough details, we added support for <xref
                                            href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/ai_positron.html#ai_positron__ai-p-rag"
                                            format="html" scope="external"><b>RAG</b></xref>
                                        (retrieval augmented generation) functions. These functions
                                        use the existing project content to give the AI engine
                                        enough useful information to create new DITA XML content. A
                                        common use for a writer is to gather data from different
                                        sources and create a first draft of a DITA XML topic, which
                                        they can refine later. This is what we aim to provide with
                                        our predefined actions.</li>
                                </ul>
                            </entry>
                        </row>
                        <row>
                            <entry>Vision support</entry>
                            <entry>Certain actions like <b>Generate Image Alternate Text</b>,
                                    <uicontrol>Generate Documentation Draft</uicontrol>, or
                                    <b>Update Content Based on Images</b> use the capabilities of
                                engines like <b>GPT-4o</b>. These engines read content from images
                                provided by the user and then use that information to write new DITA
                                XML content or update existing content. In our experience, these
                                kinds of actions are useful and work quite well to update DITA XML
                                content based on application screenshots.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row>
                            <entry>Rewrite actions</entry>
                            <entry>We created useful actions to <b>Correct Grammar</b>, <b>Improve
                                    Readability</b>, <b>Use Active Voice</b>, and <b>Improve
                                    Structure</b>. These actions are applied to existing content,
                                they have precise prompts which instruct the AI to preserve the
                                existing content as much as possible, and they are solid examples of
                                how the AI can help a writer during their daily work.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row>
                            <entry>Review actions</entry>
                            <entry>At some point, we had the idea that the AI, instead of fixing
                                problems, could leave the original content as it is and just add
                                comments around the content that needs to be changed. So, the
                                    <b>Proofread</b> action appeared as a way to allow the AI engine
                                to give advice on existing content without making any changes. In a
                                way, the AI engine becomes a reviewer of a first document draft. The
                                    <b>Resolve Comments</b> action appeared as a way to allow the AI
                                engine to fix existing comments by changing the content.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row>
                            <entry>Overview actions</entry>
                            <entry>We created some useful actions to <b>Summarize</b> or report on
                                the <b>Readability</b> of a DITA XML topic. We also created actions
                                to use AI to better understand what questions a certain topic
                                answers. In the future, using an AI engine might also include asking
                                the AI to find <b>logical inconsistencies</b> in already written
                                content, which may be too large for a person to fully digest
                                easily.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row>
                            <entry>Translate actions</entry>
                            <entry>There are studies that say the translation abilities in AI
                                engines are better than <b>Google Translate</b> or <b>DeepL</b>. The
                                available translation actions have clear prompts that tell the AI
                                engine to skip certain DITA XML tags like
                                    <xmlelement>codeblock</xmlelement> or
                                    <xmlelement>codeph</xmlelement>. In general, they seem to do a
                                good job of keeping the existing DITA XML structure, including the
                                parts of reusable content and key references.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row>
                            <entry>Intelligent agents</entry>
                            <entry>In the most recent add-on release, we added new actions like
                                    <b>Split Topic</b> and <b>Create Topics</b>. These actions give
                                the AI more freedom to process existing content and create new
                                topics on disk. The AI uses a feedback loop where it first proposes
                                a plan of action, evaluates how the content could be changed, and
                                then makes the necessary changes. These actions try to use the AI
                                engine's potential to the max by letting it plan and execute more
                                complex tasks.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row>
                            <entry>Reuse actions</entry>
                            <entry><b>DITA XML</b> is about content reuse. So, how can the AI engine
                                help with this? For now, we have created two predefined actions.
                                These actions use functions to let the AI engine access already
                                reusable components. One action replaces product names with existing
                                key references. The other action retrieves the closest reusable
                                component to the currently selected paragraph. But I think more can
                                be done in this area in the future.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row>
                            <entry>Chat</entry>
                            <entry>
                                <p>Using AI engines means accepting that an action might not always
                                    give the right content. We give you control to preview the
                                    changes suggested by the AI and then keep chatting with the AI
                                    to fine-tune the answer until it is correct.</p>
                                <p>Chatting with the AI can also be a useful way to learn how
                                    different concepts work. We added <b>RAG</b> (retrieval
                                    augmented generation) support in the chat window. This lets
                                    people search for content and get precise answers based on their
                                    own documentation project.</p>
                            </entry>
                        </row>
                        <row>
                            <entry>Specializations support</entry>
                            <entry>So, how does the AI work with DITA XML specializations that might
                                have custom <codeph>DOCTYPE</codeph> declarations or custom DITA XML
                                    elements?<p>Most of the built-in actions should work well with
                                    DITA XML specializations. For example, actions that rewrite the
                                    content or translate it should keep the existing DITA XML
                                    elements in the selection unchanged. Actions like <b>New DITA
                                        Topic</b> create basic DITA XML topics. However, there are
                                    actions like <b>Add Structured Content</b> that expand the
                                    content of an already created DITA XML topic. This allows the
                                    user to first create the DITA XML topic based on their
                                    specialization before using the AI engine. Actions like
                                        <b>Improve Structure</b> add base DITA XML elements to the
                                    selected content, so they might not use all the specialized DITA
                                    XML elements.</p></entry>
                        </row>
                        <row>
                            <entry>Third Party CMS support</entry>
                            <entry>Both Oxygen desktop and in-browser editing tools can be
                                integrated with various content management systems. Most AI
                                predefined actions should work when Oxygen is integrated with
                                third-party CMSs. However, actions that write content on disk (like
                                actions from the <b>Intelligent agents</b> category) might not be
                                able to create new topics on the CMS. Actions improved by using
                                    <b>RAG</b> (retrieval augmented generation) might also not work
                                well since the project content is stored on the CMS. Oxygen desktop
                                has an <uicontrol>Enable indexing for remote resources</uicontrol>
                                checkbox on its <uicontrol>Open/Find Resource</uicontrol> page in
                                    <b>Preferences</b>. This allows our indexing engine to index
                                content from the CMS. But the in-browser WebAuthor editing tool does
                                not yet support indexing CMS-specific content.</entry>
                        </row>
                    </tbody>
                </tgroup>
            </table>
        </p>
        <p>I hope this article, based on my experience working on AI editing tools and with AI
            editing tools, will be useful to you. As always, you can leave feedback using the Oxygen
            Feedback form, which appears below this published article.</p>
    </body>
</topic>
