<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="ai_positron">
  <title>Oxygen AI Positron Assistant Add-on</title>
  <shortdesc>The <b>Oxygen AI Positron Assistant</b> add-on provides support for helping technical
    documentation writers generate and re-write content. It also supports performing AI checks and
    AI-based modifications on <b>multiple files</b> by integrating AI extensions with XML
    technologies like <b>Schematron</b> or <b>XSLT</b>.</shortdesc>
  <prolog>
    <author>Radu Coravu</author>
    <critdates>
      <created date="2024-05-31"/>
    </critdates>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <indexterm>Add-ons<indexterm>artificial intelligence</indexterm></indexterm>
        <indexterm>AI Positron Assistant</indexterm>
        <keyword>ChatGPT</keyword>
      </keywords>
    </metadata>
  </prolog>
  <body>
    <p>This article is intended to be a general overview of the <b>Oxygen AI Positron Assistant</b>
      add-on installation, licensing and functionality. </p>
    <p>We've envisioned this add-on as a way to offer you a personal assistant containing useful
      actions for checking content (readability, grammar), translating, explaining and creating
      overviews.</p>
    <object width="560" height="315"
      data="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Do_KWYZfCFg?si=2Mrm7Bh1pmPvehqV" outputclass="iframe">
      <param name="allowfullscreen" />
    </object>
    <section id="overview">
      <title>Installation and Licensing Overview</title>
      <ul id="ul_sdg_1x5_4bc">
        <li>Oxygen desktop allows installing two flavors of the add-on:<ul id="ul_rqp_cx5_4bc">
            <li>
              <p><xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/ai_positron.html"
                  format="html" scope="external">AI Positron Assistant add-on</xref>.</p>
              <p>This add-on works through a subscription based model using the <xref
                  href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/aipositron/user_terms.html" format="html"
                  scope="external">Oxygen Positron Service</xref> platform which uses in turn the
                OpenAI API and functionality. </p>
              <p>Users can create new subscription accounts or authenticate using their existing
                  <b>Google</b> or <b>Github</b> accounts. The first subscription month is free and
                a <xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/ai_positron/buy.html#ai-positron-service"
                  format="html" scope="external">monthly subscription</xref> can be bought in order
                to benefit of a number of credits each month.</p>
              <p>You can control from the Preferences page the AI engine to be used by default for
                performing actions and for chatting.</p>
            </li>
            <li>
              <p><xref
                  href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/ai_positron_enterprise.html"
                  format="html" scope="external">AI Positron Assistant Enterprise add-on.</xref></p>
              <p>This add-on allows end users to connect to their own AI engine server. The
                following connection types are supported:<ul id="ul_twp_5z5_4bc">
                  <li>OpenAI - Connect to your own OpenAI server using your own key. Or connect to
                    OpenAI-compatible servers like <b>Ollama</b>.</li>
                  <li>Microsoft Azure Open AI - Connect to an Open AI instance hosted as a virtual
                    machine on Microsoft Azure.</li>
                  <li>Anthropic Claude - connect to Anthropic Claude using your own key.</li>
                </ul></p>
              <p>From the licensing point of view the <b>AI Positron Assistant Enterprise</b> add-on
                works free of charge with any Oxygen XML Editor installation using an
                  <b>Enterprise</b> license type for Oxygen XML Editor. For all other cases <xref
                  href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/ai_positron/buy.html?licenseType=enterprise#ai-positron-enterprise"
                  format="html" scope="external">a special license key</xref> needs to be purchased
                for the add-on to enable this direct access. You can use the Register button in the
                AI Positron Assistant side view to configure the special license key.</p>
            </li>
          </ul></li>
        <li><xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-webauthor/topics/wa-ai-positron.html"
            format="html" scope="external">Oxygen Web Author</xref> also allows installing an <b>AI
            Positron Assistant</b> plugin with similar functionality as the one in Oxygen Desktop.
          Currently the <xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/oxygen-xml-web-author/app/oxygen.html"
            format="html" scope="external">WebAuthor</xref> and <xref
            href="https://fusion.oxygenxml.com/" format="html" scope="external">Content
            Fusion</xref> online demo websites come with the AI Positron add-on pre-installed. In
          the near future an  <b>AI Positron Assistant Enterprise</b> plugin will allow using either
          a license server or a special WebAuthor license component to configure a custom AI engine
          in the plugin and deliver an on-premise web editing tool inside a company with the <b>AI
            Positron Assistant</b> add-on installed. </li>
      </ul>
    </section>
    <section id="section_qwd_mbv_4bc">
      <title>Integration and Features Overview</title>
      <p>After installing the add-on the following features are available in the Oxygen desktop:<ul
          id="ul_b43_ldv_4bc">
          <li><xref
              href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/ai_positron.html#ai_positron__section_a3d_sgl_4xb"
              format="html" scope="external">AI Positron Assistant</xref> side view. This side view
            contains the following functionality:<ul id="ul_np4_ndv_4bc">
              <li>Invoke various actions to generate and re-write content using AI.</li>
              <li><b>Chat</b> with the AI.</li>
              <li>A <b>History</b> list of previous interactions.</li>
              <li>A <b>Favorites</b> drop down list and a way to mark inputs as favorites.</li>
              <li>An <b>Attach</b> button to attach images or XML, text resources to the chat
                message.</li>
            </ul></li>
          <li><b>AI</b> main menu entry with support to invoke actions or to go to the add-ons
            preferences page.</li>
          <li><b>AI Positron Assistant</b> contextual menu for all XML documents opened in the
              <b>Author</b> visual editing mode.</li>
          <li><b>AI Positron Assistant</b> quick assist actions available on the left vertical
            stripe for all XML documents opened in the <b>Author</b> visual editing mode.</li>
          <li><b>AI Positron XML Refactoring</b> actions added to the <b>Project</b> and <b>DITA
              Maps Manager</b> views as a way to run actions on multiple files.</li>
          <li>When validation problems are displayed in the <uicontrol>Results</uicontrol> pane, you
            can right-click on a problem and use the <uicontrol>AI Positron Fix</uicontrol> action
            to ask the <b>AI Positron</b> platform for help with fixing the problem. It will propose
            content in the chat pane (within the <uicontrol>AI Positron Assistant</uicontrol> view)
            that can be used to solve the problem.</li>
          <li>The add-on contributes two <xref
              href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/ai_positron.html#ai_positron__section_j1x_jk3_qxb"
              format="html" scope="external">XPath extension functions</xref>
            <codeph>ai:transform-content</codeph> and <codeph>ai:verify-content</codeph> that can be
            used to rephrase content or to perform validation checks on existing content.</li>
        </ul></p>
    </section>
    <section id="section_hph_m3v_4bc">
      <title>Predefined and Custom Actions</title>
      <p>Once you log in to the server, a <xref
          href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/ai_positron.html#ai_positron__section_utc_twz_1xb"
          format="html" scope="external">set of predefined actions</xref> are available, grouped in
        categories: <b>Accessibility</b>, <b>Content Generation</b>, , <b>Development</b>,
          <b>Rewrite</b>, <b>Overview</b>, <b>Marketing</b> and <b>Translation</b>. The <xref
          href="https://github.com/oxygenxml-incubator/ai-positron-assistant-samples/blob/main/README.md"
          format="html" scope="external">AI Positron Assistant Samples Playground</xref> samples
        project contains useful samples to test the functionality of these actions.</p>
      <p><xref
          href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/ai_positron.html#ai_positron__section_rly_wp4_wxb"
          format="html" scope="external">Custom actions</xref> can also be created and used. The
        same <xref
          href="https://github.com/oxygenxml-incubator/ai-positron-assistant-samples/tree/main/Custom%20Actions"
          format="html" scope="external">AI Positron Assistant Samples Playground</xref> contains
        some sample custom actions. Some usage examples can be found in the <xref
          href="https://github.com/oxygenxml-incubator/ai-positron-assistant-samples/tree/main/Schematron%20and%20Quick%20Fixes"
          format="html" scope="external">samples playground</xref>.</p>
    </section>
    <section id="section_ngk_klp_pbc">
      <title>Visual Image Recognition (Vision)</title>
      <p>The pre-defined <b>Generate Documentation Draft</b> and <b>Update Content Based on
          Images</b> actions allow using the AI to create or update content depending on existing
        images from your user's manual. You can also attach images in the <b>Chat</b> panel.</p>
    </section>
    <section id="section_bws_2lv_4bc">
      <title>Batch Processing</title>
      <p>The <xref
          href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/ai_positron.html#ai_positron__ai_refactoring"
          format="html" scope="external"><b>AI Positron Refactoring</b></xref> actions added to the
          <b>Project</b> and <b>DITA Maps Manager</b> views are a way to run actions on multiple
        files. For example, you could use the predefined <uicontrol>Translate to</uicontrol> action
        to translate multiple DITA topics into a certain language or apply the <uicontrol>Correct
          Grammar</uicontrol> or <uicontrol>Improve Readability</uicontrol> actions on multiple
        resources.</p>
      <p>In addition <b>XML Refactoring</b> actions based on XSLT or XQuery can use the XPath
        extension functions added by the add-on to perform batch changes in XML documents. Some
        examples can be found in the <xref
          href="https://github.com/oxygenxml-incubator/ai-positron-assistant-samples/tree/main/XML%20Refactoring"
          format="html" scope="external">samples playground</xref>.</p>
    </section>
    <section id="section_tzn_jw5_4bc">
      <title>Useful Links</title>
      <ul id="ul_f5n_kw5_4bc">
        <li><xref
            href="https://github.com/oxygenxml-incubator/ai-positron-assistant-samples/blob/main/README.md"
            format="html" scope="external">AI Positron Assistant Samples Playground.</xref></li>
        <li>
          <xref
            href="https://idratherbewriting.com/learnapidoc/docapis_oxygenxml_positron_assistant.html"
            format="html" scope="external">Blog Post About AI Positron Add-on By Tom
          Johnson</xref></li>
        <li>
          <xref
            href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/events/2023/webinar_ai_as_a_tool_for_technical_content_creation.html"
            format="html" scope="external">Webinar: AI as a Tool for Technical Content Creation
          </xref></li>
        <li>
          <xref
            href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/events/2023/webinar_leveraging_the_power_of_ai_and_schematron_for_content_verification_and_correction.html"
            format="html" scope="external">Webinar: Leveraging the Power of AI and Schematron for
            Content Verification and Correction </xref></li>
      </ul>
    </section>
  </body>
 
</topic>
