<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="ai_positron_security_layers">
    <title>AI Positron Enterprise Security Layers</title>
    <shortdesc>The <ph keyref="oxygen"/> AI Positron add-on was designed with multiple security
        layers that help teams adopt AI in a controlled, enterprise-friendly way, from approved
        model connections and encrypted local data to masked sensitive content, restricted
        retrieval, and explicit tool approvals.</shortdesc>
    <prolog>
        <author>Radu Coravu</author>
        <critdates>
            <created date="2026-05-26"/>
        </critdates>
        <metadata>
            <keywords>
                <indexterm>AI Positron<indexterm>security</indexterm></indexterm>
                <indexterm>enterprise AI</indexterm>
                <indexterm>privacy</indexterm>
                <indexterm>RAG</indexterm>
                <indexterm>Model Context Protocol</indexterm>
                <keyword>AI Positron</keyword>
                <keyword>security</keyword>
                <keyword>privacy</keyword>
                <keyword>MCP</keyword>
            </keywords>
        </metadata>
    </prolog>
    <body>
        <p>This article focuses specifically on AI Positron used with <b>custom connections</b>
            configured in the <xref
                href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-positron-desktop/ai/service_configuration.html"
                format="html" scope="external">AI Service Configuration Preferences</xref>. </p>
        <p>One of the biggest questions organizations ask before adopting AI is simple: <q>How do we
                keep control?</q> With Oxygen AI Positron, security is not treated as an
            afterthought. The assistant was designed from the start for enterprise scenarios where
            large language models need to work together with company-specific policies, privacy
            requirements, and operational safeguards.</p>
        <p>A useful way to think about AI Positron is as a set of <b>enclosing security layers</b>. Each layer reduces risk in a different way: controlling which model is used, limiting what content can be accessed, masking sensitive information before it leaves your machine, and requiring explicit approval before potentially unsafe tools are executed.</p>
        <p>The result is an AI assistant that can be productive without becoming uncontrolled. Instead of sending everything everywhere, AI Positron gives you multiple checkpoints where administrators and end users can decide what is allowed.</p>
        <section id="security_layers_overview">
            <title>Security layers at a glance</title>
            <dl>
                <dlentry>
                    <dt>1. Approved LLM connection</dt>
                    <dd>
                        <p>With AI Positron Enterprise licensing, you can connect the assistant to
                            an approved and vetted LLM provider of your choice by configuring a
                            custom connection in the <b>Connections</b> section of the <xref
                                href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-positron-desktop/ai/service_configuration.html"
                                format="html" scope="external">AI Service Configuration
                                Preferences</xref>. The custom connection approach allows you to
                            define connections to providers such as <b>OpenAI</b>, <b>MS Azure
                                AI</b>, <b>Claude</b>, <b>AWS Bedrock</b>, <b>Google Gemini</b>, and
                                <b>xAI Grok</b>. Additional add-ons are also available for <b>Vertex
                                AI</b> or for a custom AI service connector.</p>
                        <p>This matters because many organizations do not want users connecting to arbitrary public AI services. AI Positron lets teams standardize on approved providers and centrally define how those connections are configured.</p>
                        <p>The <b>connection</b> between the AI Positron Assistant and your
                            configured LLM connector is <b>direct</b>, <b>no</b> data is passed
                            through any proxy service or used by our organization in any way.</p>
                    </dd>
                </dlentry>
                <dlentry>
                    <dt>2. Encrypted locally stored data</dt>
                    <dd>
                        <p>AI Positron stores sensitive local information such as keys, tokens, chat history, favorites, and caches in a protected way. The <xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-positron-desktop/ai/privacy_preferences.html" format="html" scope="external">Privacy Preferences</xref> page also includes a <uicontrol>Delete data</uicontrol> action that can permanently remove stored AI Positron data, including personal data and preference settings.</p>
                        <p>This gives users and administrators a practical cleanup mechanism when working with confidential projects or when resetting a workstation.</p>
                    </dd>
                </dlentry>
                <dlentry>
                    <dt>3. Sensitive data masking before requests are sent</dt>
                    <dd>
                        <p>The <xref
                                href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-positron-desktop/ai/privacy_preferences.html"
                                format="html" scope="external">Privacy Preferences</xref> page can
                            automatically identify and mask sensitive information in AI requests.
                            This can include email addresses, phone numbers, IDs, and API keys. You
                            can also define custom masking patterns for organization-specific
                            secrets.</p>
                        <p>The masked information is automatically restored by the AI Assistant in
                            the AI response, so users still see the correct content while the
                            external AI service receives a safer version of the request.</p>
                    </dd>
                </dlentry>
                <dlentry>
                    <dt>4. Ignore selected project resources from AI processing</dt>
                    <dd>
                        <p>If certain folders or files should never be considered by the assistant,
                            you can place an <xref
                                href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-positron-desktop/ai/functionality_features.html#functionality_features__section_ukv_f5h_1fc"
                                format="html" scope="external"
                                ><filepath>.ai-ignore</filepath></xref> file in project folders to
                            exclude resources from AI processing. This is especially useful for
                            confidential drafts, legal material, generated output, or internal-only
                            assets that should remain outside the assistant's working context.</p>
                        <p>This layer is simple but powerful: not every file in a repository should be visible to AI, and exclusion rules help enforce that boundary.</p>
                    </dd>
                </dlentry>
                <dlentry>
                    <dt>5. Retrieval-Augmented Generation with explicit scope limits</dt>
                    <dd>
                        <p>AI Positron can use Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) to search the
                            current project for relevant content, but this behavior is configurable.
                            In the <xref
                                href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-positron-desktop/ai/tools_rag_preferences.html"
                                format="html" scope="external">Tools and RAG Preferences</xref>
                            page, you can enable project-based RAG, ask for confirmation before each
                            project-based retrieval, and set a <b>content retrieval token limit</b>
                            to cap how much project content may be sent to the AI engine.</p>
                        <p>You can also restrict where tools are allowed to read and write by using the <uicontrol>Limit read/write access to</uicontrol> setting. By default, access is restricted to the project directory and the directory of the current root map.</p>
                        <p>In other words, AI Positron does not have to search your entire machine. You can narrow its working area to the places that make sense for the current documentation project.</p>
                    </dd>
                </dlentry>
                <dlentry>
                    <dt>6. Controlled access to external websites</dt>
                    <dd>
                        <p>When the assistant attempts to retrieve content from a website, AI
                            Positron can ask for explicit user confirmation first. The <xref
                                href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-positron-desktop/ai/tools_rag_preferences.html"
                                format="html" scope="external">Tools and RAG Preferences</xref> page
                            includes an option to <uicontrol>Ask for confirmation before retrieving
                                content from websites</uicontrol> (enabled by default).</p>
                        <p>This is an important safeguard against silent browsing. Users remain aware when external content is about to be pulled into the AI context, and they can decide whether a particular host should be trusted.</p>
                    </dd>
                </dlentry>
                <dlentry>
                    <dt>7. Controlled Model Context Protocol (MCP) tool access</dt>
                    <dd>
                        <p>AI Positron can be extended with tools provided through the <xref
                                href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-positron-desktop/ai/model_context_protocol_preferences.html"
                                format="html" scope="external">Model Context Protocol
                                Preferences</xref> page. This is powerful, but it is also where
                            strong controls matter most.</p>
                        <p>By default, tool calls obtained from MCP servers require user approval.
                            The <xref
                                href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-positron-desktop/ai/unsafe_tool_approval_preferences.html"
                                format="html" scope="external">Unsafe Tool Auto-Approval
                                Preferences</xref> page lets you review and manage which tool
                            prefixes are always allowed.</p>
                    </dd>
                </dlentry>
                <dlentry>
                    <dt>8. Fine-grained approval for other unsafe tools</dt>
                    <dd>
                        <p>Some tool calls can be previewed or undone, while others cannot. AI
                            Positron treats tools that cannot be undone or previewed as
                                <b>unsafe</b>. This includes all MCP tools and tools used to run
                            command lines.</p>
                        <p>That means the assistant does not simply decide on its own to execute potentially risky operations. Instead, the user stays in the loop and can approve a single tool call, always allow a specific tool prefix, or keep requiring confirmation.</p>
                    </dd>
                </dlentry>
                <dlentry>
                    <dt>9. Control Content Created by the LLM</dt>
                    <dd>
                        <p>Security is not only about protecting data. It is also about controlling
                            what the LLM produces. With AI Positron, you can define a <b>project
                                context prompt</b> and attach <b>additional context files</b> so
                            every chat request and AI action is guided by your documentation
                            standards, terminology, and company policies.</p>
                        <p>You can also create <b>custom AI actions</b> that do much more than
                            generic prompting: they can use precise prompts, target only the current
                            selection or the entire document, choose specific models, invoke tools,
                            validate results, and even insert or replace content in controlled ways.
                            AI Positron offers validation in accordance with the custom validation
                            rules imposed by the company and terminology checking with the Oxygen
                                <xref
                                href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-addons/topics/terminology-checker-addon.html"
                                format="html" scope="external">Terminology Checker</xref>
                            add-on.</p>
                        <p>For more advanced governance, you can create reusable <b>skills</b> that
                            provide domain-specific workflows and best practices on demand, turning
                            the assistant into a specialist for your documentation environment. This
                            means you can build review actions that check style-guide compliance,
                            detect logical inconsistencies, generate structured XML in approved
                            patterns, or enforce organization-specific authoring rules before
                            content is accepted. See the official documentation for <xref
                                href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-positron-desktop/ai/preferences.html"
                                format="html" scope="external">AI Positron preferences</xref>, <xref
                                href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-positron-desktop/ai/creating_custom_ai_actions.html"
                                format="html" scope="external">creating custom AI actions</xref>,
                            and <xref
                                href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-positron-desktop/ai/ai_positron_skills_creation.html"
                                format="html" scope="external">creating custom AI skills</xref>.</p>
                        <p>At any moment in time, AI Positron puts you in charge of accepting
                            changes, reviewing and incorporating changes.</p>
                    </dd>
                </dlentry>
                <dlentry>
                    <dt>10. Intercept AI Events via Hooks</dt>
                    <dd>
                        <p>AI Positron includes a <xref
                                href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-positron-desktop/ai/ai_positron_enterprise-hooks.html"
                                format="html" scope="external">hook system</xref> for intercepting
                            AI events to help monitor, govern, and shape AI behavior, giving you
                            greater visibility and control over AI-driven workflows. This lets you
                            audit AI actions, enforce organizational policies, collect usage
                            metrics, and block risky operations before they execute. </p>
                    </dd>
                </dlentry>
            </dl>
        </section>
        <section id="why_layers_matter">
            <title>Why this layered approach matters</title>
            <p>No single checkbox can make AI safe for enterprise use. Real-world deployments need multiple controls working together. A trusted model connection alone is not enough if sensitive data is sent unmasked. Masking alone is not enough if tools can read arbitrary locations. Restricting file access is not enough if unsafe external tools run without approval.</p>
            <p>AI Positron addresses this by combining <b>provider control</b>, <b>data protection</b>, <b>scope limitation</b>, and <b>human approval</b>. This layered design makes it easier to introduce AI gradually: start with a vetted connector, enable masking, restrict project access, and only then expand into RAG or MCP integrations where appropriate.</p>
        </section>
        <section id="practical_adoption_advice">
            <title>Practical security advice for teams adopting AI Positron</title>
            <ul>
                <li>Start with a company approved connector configured in the <xref
                        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-positron-desktop/ai/service_configuration.html"
                        format="html" scope="external">AI Service Configuration Preferences</xref>
                    page.</li>
                <li>Enable built-in masking and add custom patterns for organization-specific
                    secrets in the <xref
                        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-positron-desktop/ai/privacy_preferences.html"
                        format="html" scope="external">Privacy Preferences</xref> page.</li>
                <li>Use <filepath>.aiignore</filepath> files to exclude confidential folders from AI processing.</li>
                <li>Keep project-based RAG enabled only for the folders that should actually contribute context, and use confirmation prompts when needed.</li>
                <li>Be conservative with MCP integrations. Prefer read-only or narrowly scoped servers where possible, and review unsafe tool approvals regularly.</li>
                <li>Share project-level preferences when you want a team to follow the same guardrails.</li>
            </ul>
        </section>
        <section id="learn_more">
            <title>Learn more</title>
            <p>A recording where I show all these security aspects in Oxygen is available on my
                YouTube Channel: <object data="https://www.youtube.com/embed/kkrdry1m0F0&amp;t=91s"
                    outputclass="iframe">
                    <param name="allowfullscreen"/>
                </object></p>
            <p>If you want to explore the official documentation behind these controls, start with these pages:</p>
            <ul>
                <li><xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-positron-desktop/ai/service_configuration.html" format="html" scope="external">AI Service Configuration Preferences</xref></li>
                <li><xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-positron-desktop/ai/privacy_preferences.html" format="html" scope="external">Privacy Preferences</xref></li>
                <li><xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-positron-desktop/ai/tools_rag_preferences.html" format="html" scope="external">Tools and RAG Preferences</xref></li>
                <li><xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-positron-desktop/ai/unsafe_tool_approval_preferences.html" format="html" scope="external">Unsafe Tool Auto-Approval Preferences</xref></li>
                <li><xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-positron-desktop/ai/model_context_protocol_preferences.html" format="html" scope="external">Model Context Protocol Preferences</xref></li>
                <li><xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-positron-desktop/ai/ai_positron.html" format="html" scope="external">AI Positron Overview</xref></li>
            </ul>
        </section>
    </body>
</topic>