<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="all_about_oxygen_add_ons">
    <title>Oxygen Add-ons</title>
    <body>
        <p><ph keyref="oxygen"/> can be extended to support new functionalities and vocabularies.
            These extensions can be either plugins or frameworks: <xref
                href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/dev_guide/introduction-dev-guide.html"
                format="html" scope="external"/>.</p>
        <section id="section_ryq_zqp_jkb">
            <title>Short History of Plugin Support</title>
            <p>The initial support for plugins was primitive, it allowed adding a contextual menu
                action in the Text editing mode for manipulating the selected content: <xref
                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/versions/21.1/ug-editor/topics/text-editing-mode-plugins.html"
                    format="html" scope="external"/>.</p>
            <p>In version 11.2 the Workspace Access plugin type was added: <xref
                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/workspace-access-plugin.html"
                    format="html" scope="external"/>.</p>
            <p>Workspace Access plugins allow you to add custom toolbar and menu actions, custom
                side views and add various behaviors depending on various events which occur in the
                application (documents are opened, closed, saved, the application is started or
                closed). They can be implemented either in Java or Javascript.</p>
            <p>Originally plugins could be manually installed by being copied to the
                    <filepath>OXYGEN_INSTALL_DIR\plugins</filepath>. Around version 14 we added
                support to pack plugins and frameworks as <xref href="packing-add-ons.dita"
                    >add-ons</xref>and thus automate the installation process.</p>
        </section>
        <section id="section_en5_nrp_jkb">
            <title>Short History of Frameworks Support</title>
            <p>The concept of framework appeared around <ph keyref="oxygen"/> version 9.</p>
            <p>A framework is a means to group together resources for editing and validating a
                specific XML vocabulary: <xref
                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/glossary/framework.html"
                    format="html" scope="external"/>.</p>
            <p>In version 16 we added support to extend a base framework, extension which can
                afterwards be bundled as an add-on.</p>
        </section>
        <section id="section_eqq_lxp_jkb">
            <title>Private Hosted Plugins and Frameworks</title>
            <p>Content Management Systems like Astoria, Bluestream, Ixiasoft, SDL have implemented
                plugins which allow <ph keyref="oxygen"/> to connect to their servers.</p>
            <p>There are also probably lots of privately owned frameworks used for editing various
                varieties of XML documents inside companies.</p>
        </section>
        <section id="section_z4s_kxp_jkb">
            <title>Public Hosted Plugins and Frameworks</title>
            <p>There is an older blog post with an up to date list of <xref
                    href="Oxygen%20plugins%20and%20frameworks.xml"/>.</p>
        </section>
        <section id="section_b52_vwp_jkb">
            <title>Why are we (the <ph keyref="oxygen"/> team) working on add-ons?</title>
            <p>Open source add-ons are useful as samples for third parties.</p>
            <p>Add-ons can be released at a much faster pace.</p>
            <p>Interns who work for us for a couple of months are not allowed to work on the main
                    <ph keyref="oxygen"/> code.</p>
            <p>We can work on add-ons before <ph keyref="oxygen"/> releases when we enter a code
                freeze stage.</p>
        </section>
    </body>
</topic>
