<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="collaboration_for_documenting_software">
    <title>Collaboration for Documenting a Software Product using DITA</title>
    <body>
        <p>
            <div><p>Besides working on an <b>XML Editor</b> with lots of <b>DITA</b> editing
                    functionality we also use DITA internally for editing the <b>Oxygen User's
                        Guide</b>. </p><p>In this article I will try to give you an overview of our
                    entire workflow as evidence that <b>DITA</b> does work and that it can be used
                    and implemented without expensive solutions. </p> First here's an overview of
                our needs:<ul id="ul_z4f_v2r_yjb">
                    <li><b>Offline Help</b> which is available inside the installed application.
                        Oxygen is a multi-platform application so we need to generate both <b>HTML
                            Help</b> (CHM) for <b>Windows</b> and <b>JavaHelp</b> for the <b>Mac
                            OSX</b> and <b>Linux</b> installations. Also for the <b>Oxygen Eclipse
                            Plugin</b> we need to generate <b>Eclipse Help</b>.</li>
                    <li><b>Online Help</b> which is available as <xref
                            href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-oxygen/" format="html"
                            scope="external"><b>WebHelp with Feedback</b></xref> on our web site and
                        allows users to add comments to each topic. Those comments can then be used
                        by us to rephrase and improve our documentation.</li>
                    <li><b>PDF</b> containing the entire contents of the user's manual. Nowadays
                        most our users use the online <b>WebHelp</b> because it can be used much
                        easier for finding certain topics so in our case at least the <b>PDF</b>
                        output is not popular anymore along users.</li>
                </ul><p>We have two main distributions (<b>Standalone</b> and <b>Eclipse plugin</b>)
                    and three main products (<b>Editor</b>, <b>Developer</b> and <b>Author</b>). So
                    we need to produce about six (6) different publications from the same
                        <b>DITA</b> content depending on the shipped product.</p><p>And here's an
                    overview of the tools we use:</p></div>
        </p>
        <bodydiv><section id="section_wmw_v2r_yjb"><title><ph keyref="oxygen"/></title><p>This may not
                    come as a surprise but we use our own product to edit <b>DITA</b> content,
                    partly because it's ours and partly because it is a very good tool. During the
                    last couple of years this has been a good opportunity to improve our product
                    based on our own feedback (feedback coming from our technical
                    writers).</p><b>Oxygen</b> is used in two ways:<ol id="ol_xmw_v2r_yjb">
                    <li>By the technical writers to write DITA content.</li>
                    <li>By the reviewers to review documented issues by adding comments, making
                        changes with change tracking enabled.</li>
                </ol></section><section id="section_ymw_v2r_yjb">
                <title>DITA Open Toolkit + WebHelp plugin</title>
                <p>We use the DITA Open Toolkit to publish DITA content to the outputs we are
                    interested in. The <b>WebHelp</b> and <b>WebHelp with Feedback</b> outputs are
                    our own additions to the <b>DITA Open Toolkit</b>. But we do not use any special
                    customizations for the other outputs.</p>
            </section><section id="section_zmw_v2r_yjb">
                <title>Jenkins integration server</title>
                <p>We have an automated script which builds all the user manual outputs every
                    night.</p>
            </section><b>Automated DITA Content Validation</b> There is a script which runs on a
            test server and does three types of checks on the <b>DITA</b> content:<ol
                id="ol_anw_v2r_yjb">
                <li>Validate and check for completeness, check for broken links, images, broken web
                    links and so on.</li>
                <li>Check and report topics, resources and images which are no longer referenced
                    anywhere.</li>
                <li>Spell check the entire DITA content.</li>
            </ol><section id="section_bnw_v2r_yjb">
                <title>Git as a version control system</title>
                <p>For a long time we used <b>Subversion</b> for version control. Recently we moved
                    our DITA content to a private <b>GitHub</b> repository and we also made a public
                        <b>GitHub</b> repository containing a copy of our user manual's DITA
                        content:<xref href="https://github.com/oxygenxml/userguide" format="html"
                        scope="external"/>. We use the
                        <b>SourceTree</b> application to work with <b>Git</b> and we are quite happy
                    with it.</p>
            </section><section id="section_hch_w2r_yjb">
                <title>Atlassian Jira for workflow</title>
                <p>We use Atlassian Jira to provide a workflow both for the issues which are related
                    directly to our software product and for the issues which are related
                    exclusively with our user's manual. The JIRA is integrated with both our
                        <b>SVN</b> and <b>GIT</b> repositories so it shows for a certain issue all
                    resources which have been modified to fix it.</p>
                <p>More details about how with work with <b>DITA</b> can be found in these slides I
                    presented at <b>DITA Europe 2014</b>:<xref
                        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/forum/files/usingDitaForOxygenUsersManual.odp"
                        format="html" scope="external"/>.</p>
                <p>Video demonstration showing how collaboration on a technical publication with
                    Subversion can be achieved: <xref
                        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/demo/Collaborative_Authoring_Using_Subversion.html"
                        format="html" scope="external"/>.</p>
            </section></bodydiv>
    </body>
</topic>
