<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="topic_nnt_5zn_zhc">
    <title>Content Fusion Cloud CMS Overview</title>
    <body>
        <p>We recently made available our <b>Content Fusion</b> content management server as a <xref
                href="https://fusion.oxygenxml.com/" format="html" scope="external">cloud
                solution</xref>, aimed at companies or individuals who want to securely
                <b>manage</b>, <b>create</b>, <b>edit</b>, <b>review</b> and <b>publish</b>
            technical documentation projects without the need to install server side components on
            their own servers. </p>
        <p>As a <xref href="https://github.com/raducoravu" format="html" scope="external">software
                engineer</xref> whose development has been mostly focused on the <b>Oxygen XML</b>
            desktop products, I've been skeptical in general of using web editing tools. But now, as
            I'm sipping my hot chocolate and using <b><xref href="https://fusion.oxygenxml.com/"
                    format="html" scope="external">Content Fusion Cloud</xref></b> connected to the
                <xref href="https://github.com/oxygenxml/blog" format="html" scope="external">Oxygen
                XML Blog</xref> Git repository to write this blog post, I see that things are
            running smooth indeed.</p>
        <p>I will list below some of the <b>Content Fusion Cloud</b> main characteristics and then I
            will try to expand on each of them. My last section in this article will be about what's
            missing and how it can be compensated.</p>
        <p>
            <ul id="ul_zsw_s14_zhc">
                <li><b>Create an organization</b>. Your organization will let you invite and manage
                    members, control the subscription, authentication and security details.</li>
                <li><b>Assign roles</b> in the organization. There are now two types of roles:
                    writers and subject scheme members.</li>
                <li><b>Create projects</b> in your organization. Your projects can be either local
                    to the server or synchronized in real time with a private or public project on
                    an existing public Git server like GitHub or GitLab.</li>
                <li>Work on projects with full support for editing the publication table of
                    contents, project wide search and validation. For <b>DITA XML</b> files you will
                    benefit from the rich possibilities offered for content reuse, filtering and
                    customization offered by the standard. Full <b>history</b> support and
                    mechanisms to <b>merge changes and manage potential conflicts</b> are
                    included.</li>
                <li>Create, manage and integrate <b>feature, release or review branches</b>.</li>
                <li>Create <b>review tasks</b> and assign them to Subject Matter Experts. Review
                    tasks can be <b>edited</b>
                    <b>sequentially</b> or <b>simultaneously</b> by multiple SMEs.</li>
                <li>Use the <b>AI Positron</b> side view (with a separate subscription model) to
                    make changes in your project, review content using the numerous included AI
                    actions or vibe write.</li>
                <li><b>Define deliverables</b>, <b>create publishing templates</b> and
                        <b>publish</b> them to <b>WebHelp</b> or <b>PDF</b> formats. Limited output
                    hosting is also included to test and see how your deliverables look like on the
                    web.</li>
                <li><b>Integration</b> with the <b>Oxygen XML</b> desktop applications via the
                        <b>Content Fusion</b> add-on allowing Oxygen XML desktop users to edit or
                    create review tasks in the <b>Content Fusion</b> platform.</li>
                <li>For <b>Content Fusion</b> projects which are synchronized with an external
                        <b>Git</b> repository you can access the project content using any type of
                    Git tools.</li>
                <li>A <b>30 day trial</b> to freely use the <b>CMS</b> and see if it is fit for your
                    use and organization.</li>
            </ul>
        </p>
    </body>
</topic>
