<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="creating_graphs_from_dita_maps">
    <title>Creating Link Graphs From DITA Maps</title>
	<prolog>
		<author>raducoravu</author>
		<critdates>
			<created date="2021-09-2"/>
		</critdates>
	</prolog>
    <body>
        <p>It may be sometimes useful as an overview to obtain a graphical visualization of how your
			DITA topics refer to each other. The <xref
			href="https://visjs.github.io/vis-network/docs/network/index.html" format="html"
			scope="external">VisJS</xref> Javascript library can be used to construct node network
			diagrams. Here's how you can use it for your DITA project:<ol id="ol_slp_cym_5qb">
			<li>Open the main DITA Map in the <ph keyref="oxygen"/> <uicontrol>DITA Maps Manager</uicontrol>
				view, use the <uicontrol>Configure Transformation Scenarios</uicontrol> button, then
				create a new transformation scenario of type <uicontrol>DITA OT
				Transformation</uicontrol> choosing the <uicontrol>Merge DITA Content to Single XML
				file</uicontrol> transformation type. If you are not using <ph keyref="oxygen"/> you
				can download and install the <uicontrol>dita-merge</uicontrol> plugin separately
				from <xref href="https://github.com/oxygenxml/dita-merged" format="html"
				scope="external">Github</xref>.</li>
			<li>Apply the new transformation scenario on the DITA Map, once the merged XML document
				is generated, create another transformation scenario of type <uicontrol>XML
				transformation with XSLT</uicontrol> and transform to HTML using the XSLT
				stylesheet: <xref
				href="https://github.com/oxygenxml/dita-merged/blob/master/possible-applications/createHTMLVisGraph.xsl"
				format="xsl" scope="external"/></li>
			<li>Open the result HTML document in a web browser. Depending on the complexity of the DITA
				project it may take some time for the diagram to show up. As an example the related
				links section below contains a reference to a diagram representation of the Oxygen
				XML Blog. If we regard the diagram as a circle, on the outer bounds of the circle
				are topics which have few incoming and outgoing links and in the center topics which
				have many outgoing and incoming links. Links from the DITA Map to the topics are not
				taken into account. You can interact with the diagram by dragging nodes and by using
				the mouse wheel to zoom in or out.</li>
			</ol></p>
    </body>
	<related-links>
		<link href="../resources/sampleGraphBlog.html" format="html">
			<linktext>Graph Visualization of the Oxygen XML Blog DITA Map</linktext>
		</link>
	</related-links>
</topic>
