<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="customizing_ai_tools_for_your_dita_xml_project_terminology_style_guide_and_specializations">
    <title>Customizing AI Positron for Your DITA XML Project</title>
    <prolog>
        <author>Radu Coravu</author>
        <critdates>
            <created date="2025-05-19"/>
        </critdates>
    </prolog>
    <body>
        <p>The <xref href="ai_positron.dita"/> includes a variety of helpful AI actions designed to
            boost productivity. However, <b>DITA XML</b> projects have specific requirements. They
            often need particular <b>terminology</b> and adherence to <b>style guide rules</b>, or
            they may rely on company-specific <b>DITA</b> specialization DTDs/schemas that differ
            from the standard <b>DITA DTDs</b> on which the AI models are trained. Therefore, to
            generate high-quality content using the AI actions, the add-on must be configured to
            understand the unique aspects of the <b>DITA XML</b> project it will be used with. </p>
        <section id="section_kjj_sdn_jfc">
            <title>AI Tools Pros/Cons</title>
        </section>
        <p>With their ability to <b>rewrite</b>, <b>research</b> and <b>generate documentation
                drafts</b> AI models can be useful in a variety of cases as long as aspects specific
            to the current DITA XML project can be controlled and enforced.</p>
        <table frame="all" rowsep="1" colsep="1" id="table_cmr_5dn_jfc">
            <tgroup cols="2">
                <colspec colnum="1" colname="c1" colwidth="1*"/>
                <colspec colnum="2" colname="c2" colwidth="1*"/>
                <thead>
                    <row>
                        <entry>Good</entry>
                        <entry>Bad/Ugly</entry>
                    </row>
                </thead>
                <tbody>
                    <row>
                        <entry><b>Re-write</b> content (correct grammar, active voice, style,
                            readability improvements).</entry>
                        <entry>The company specific style guide might impose certain rules which by
                            default are not taken into account by the AI model.</entry>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <entry><b>Generating draft content</b> by combining multiple sources
                            (including images, attached <b>PDF</b>, <b>Word</b> or <b>Markdown</b>
                            documents).</entry>
                        <entry>Hallucinations when generating content if not enough quality context
                            information is provided. The overall terminology or style guide is not
                            taken into account. The DITA XML specializations are also not taken into
                            account by default.</entry>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <entry><b>Research</b> / <b>Explain</b> concepts (chat).</entry>
                        <entry>By default an AI model responds to questions based on its training
                            and not on the content from the current user’s manual.</entry>
                    </row>
                </tbody>
            </tgroup>
        </table>
        <section id="section_scz_5ln_jfc">
            <title>Access Content From Your Project</title>
            <p>By default when <b>researching</b> or <b>asking</b> the AI questions, <xref
                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-addons/topics/ai_positron.html#ai_positron__ai-p-rag"
                    format="html" scope="external">Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG)</xref> tools
                give the AI access to <b>search for specific keywords</b> in your current DITA XML
                documentation and thus provide the AI access to the content of topics which are
                related and relevant to your discussion.</p>
            <p>Bundled AI actions like <b>Generate Documentation Draft</b>, <b>Expand Draft</b>,
                    <b>Create Topics</b> give the AI model access to the current indexed DITA XML
                project to retrieve the topics with content similar to the new content which needs
                to be created.</p>
            <p>You can create your own <xref
                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-addons/topics/ai_positron.html#ai_positron__section_rly_wp4_wxb"
                    format="html" scope="external">custom AI actions</xref> which allow RAG access
                to the current project contents for the AI engine. An example can be found <xref
                    href="https://github.com/oxygenxml-incubator/ai-positron-assistant-samples/blob/main/Custom%20Actions/add-related-links.json"
                    format="html" scope="external">here</xref>.</p>
        </section>
        <section id="section_zlt_mpn_jfc">
            <title>Overall Project Context and Audience</title>
            <p>In the Oxygen <b>Preferences</b>
                <b>AI Positron Assistant</b> preferences page you can set in the <xref
                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-addons/topics/ai_positron.html#ai_positron__section_b5p_y14_wxb"
                    format="html" scope="external"><b>Context</b></xref> text area general
                information about the current project and the intended audience. This context
                information will be used subsequently for all AI actions and chat sessions. </p>
            <p>Example of a context which establishes an overall project scope and
                audience:<codeblock id="codeblock_vkr_btn_jfc"># Project context

The current project contains technical documentation for a fun and easy to drive 
dune vehicle named the Sharkfin Rover.

# Audience

Technical documentation must be precise and easy to understand. 
Our clients are not technical, they are usually beginners when it comes to driving 
and their understanding of English may vary.</codeblock></p>
            <p>The same context information should be expanded to include terminology and style
                guide information for the current project. An example can be found <xref
                    href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/oxygenxml-incubator/ai-positron-assistant-samples/refs/heads/main/Custom%20Actions/ai-context-sample.md"
                    format="html" scope="external">here </xref>.</p>
        </section>
        <section id="section_ugq_jpn_jfc">
            <title>Terminology Rules</title>
            <p>A DITA XML project may define in various formats allowed terms and certain synonyms
                which are not recommended to be used instead of the allowed terminology.</p>
            <p>The <xref
                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-addons/topics/ai_positron.html#ai_positron__section_b5p_y14_wxb"
                    format="html" scope="external"><b>Context</b></xref> text area from the Oxygen
                    <b>Preferences</b>
                <b>AI Positron Assistant</b> preferences page can also contain rules for the most
                important terms and disallowed synonyms. </p>
            <p>Example of context which establishes some of the most important
                terms:<codeblock id="codeblock_spl_xtn_jfc"># Terminology

Specific terms in the DITA XML content must be wrapped in the &lt;term> element. Preserve all such terms and do not attempt to replace them with possible synonyms.

Always prefer to use the terms below instead of possible synonyms:
```
Sharkfin Rover (instead of 'Sharkfin Buggy')
vehicle (instead of 'car')
lorry (instead of 'truck')
rear position lamp (instead of 'tailgate')
powertrain (instead of 'drivetrain')
petrol engine (instead of 'Otto engine')
motorcycle (instead of 'motor-bike')
engine (instead of 'motor')
electronic stability control (instead of 'ESP')
motor vehicle chassis (instead of 'vehicle frame')
```</codeblock></p>
            <p>Once the AI model receives the imposed terminology rules as part of the prompt context
                it will take them into account for all interactions, for example for creating
                documentation drafts from content which was written without taking the terminology
                into account.</p>
            <p>The Oxygen <xref
                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-addons/topics/terminology-checker-addon.html"
                    format="html" scope="external">Terminology Checker add-on</xref> can be
                configured with a terminology rules file which allows it to highlight in real time
                terminology problems and propose replacement for them. You can find <xref
                    href="https://github.com/oxygenxml-incubator/ai-positron-assistant-samples/blob/main/oxygen-term-checker/terms.xml"
                    format="html" scope="external">here</xref> a sample terminology rules file.
                There is a <xref
                    href="https://github.com/oxygenxml-incubator/ai-positron-assistant-samples/blob/main/Custom%20Actions/create-term-checker-rules.json"
                    format="html" scope="external">sample AI action</xref> which can generate an XML
                rules file from the add-on based on a style guide.</p>
            <p>Once the <b>Terminology Checker</b> add-on is installed and flags the terminology
                problems in the <uicontrol>Author</uicontrol> visual editor mode you can use the
                    <uicontrol>Fix Terminology Problems</uicontrol> AI action to fix terminology
                problems in the current opened topic's contents.</p>
            <p>As a conclusion you can add your most important terminology rules in the AI Context
                setting to create and process DITA XML content while obeying directly the rules. But
                installing the terminology checker add-on allows you to see terminology problems
                highlighted in the visual editor and to fix them using the AI engine with the
                bundled <uicontrol>Fix Terminology Problems</uicontrol> AI action.</p>
        </section>
        <section id="section_fg1_g14_jfc">
            <title>Style Guide</title>
            <p>A style guide is a set of project specific standards and guidelines used to ensure
                consistency and clarity in technical documentation. A company's style guide may come
                in various formats (DITA XML, Markdown, Word, so on) but some of the most important
                rules in the style guide can be distilled and set in the Oxygen <b>Preferences</b>
                <b>AI Positron Assistant</b> preferences page in the <xref
                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-addons/topics/ai_positron.html#ai_positron__section_b5p_y14_wxb"
                    format="html" scope="external"><b>Context</b></xref> text area</p>
            <p>Example of context which establishes some of the most important style guide
                rules:<codeblock id="codeblock_y3q_m14_jfc"># Style guide

There is a set of company specific Style Guide rules which are important to follow when rewriting or creating new content, the most important rules are mentioned below:

- Never use a metaphor, simile, or other figure of speech.
- Never use a long word where a short one will do.
- Keep sentences short. If it is possible to cut a word out, always cut it out.
- Never use the passive where you can use the active.
- Never use a foreign phrase, a scientific word, or a jargon word if you can think of an everyday English equivalent.
- Don’t use text that points to other topics such as "In the document below" or "in the following section."
- Some words or phrases are disallowed to be used. Mapping of disallowed phrases to their valid equivalent constructs:
```
as well as, in addition to => and
at this time, at this/that point in time => currently, now/then
advance planning => planning
by means of => by
by reason of => because of
due to the fact => because
during the course of => during
end result => result
```</codeblock></p>
            <p>The Oxygen <xref
                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-addons/topics/terminology-checker-addon.html"
                    format="html" scope="external">Terminology Checker add-on</xref> can also match
                disallowed words and phrases in the terminology rules file allowing you to see in
                the visual editor the style guide problems and to correct them using the bundled
                    <uicontrol>Fix Terminology Problems</uicontrol> AI action. </p>
            <p><b>Style Guide</b> rules may also impose structural aspects for the DITA XML content
                and such rules can be automated by converting them to <xref
                    href="SchematronBCs.dita">Schematron rules</xref>. Once such Schematron rules are added
                to the DITA XML project and start showing errors in the edited content the bundled
                    <b>Fix Validation Problems</b> AI action can be used to ask the AI to fix the
                reported problems in the current document. If the AI engine attempts to save content
                to a topic and the saved content has validation problems, the AI receives the
                validation problems and attempts to auto fix the problems until the topic becomes
                valid.</p>
            <p>An alternative to defining style guide in the AI context prompt or to impose them
                after the content is generated would be to create a fine tuned AI model trained with
                small examples based on the internal style guide and created using also an AI
                model.</p>
        </section>
        <section id="section_lyz_ph4_jfc">
            <title>DITA XML DTD/Schemas Specialization</title>
            <p>Quite often a company which uses the DITA XML standard may decide to create a DTD or
                RelaxNG based specialization which defines new XML elements which are not known by
                the AI engine.</p>
            <p>Most bundled AI actions attempt to preserve as much as possible the existing XML
                structure. AI actions like <uicontrol>Expand Draft</uicontrol> start from a newly
                created DITA XML topic and thus preserves the existing DTD/schema reference and XML
                elements. </p>
            <p>Actions like <uicontrol>Generate Documentation Draft</uicontrol> can specify in their
                definition that a certain XML structure must be generated. An example for this can
                be found <xref
                    href="https://github.com/oxygenxml-incubator/ai-positron-assistant-samples/blob/main/Documentation%20Draft/Formant%20and%20Indent%20Sample/doc-draft-model-specialization.xml"
                    format="html" scope="external">here</xref>.</p>
            <p>The most important XML vocabulary changes (DTD/schema references, newly added XML
                elements) can be distilled and set in the Oxygen <b>Preferences</b>
                <b>AI Positron Assistant</b> preferences page in the <xref
                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-addons/topics/ai_positron.html#ai_positron__section_b5p_y14_wxb"
                    format="html" scope="external"><b>Context</b></xref> text area.</p>
            <p>Example of vocabulary changes described in the prompt context:</p>
            <codeblock id="codeblock_xrj_jq4_jfc"># Vocabulary Changes

DITA XML topics generated for our project's user's manual have the following structure and DOCTYPE declaration:

```
&lt;!DOCTYPE oxyTopic PUBLIC "OXY-PUB-TOPIC" "oxy-system">
&lt;oxyTopic>
    &lt;title>&amp;lt;/title>
    &lt;body>
           
    &lt;/body>
&lt;/oxyTopic>
```

DITA XML concepts generated for our project's user's manual have the following structure and DOCTYPE declaration:

```
&lt;!DOCTYPE oxyConcept PUBLIC "OXY-PUB-CONCEPT" "oxy-system">
&lt;oxyConcept>
    &lt;title>&amp;lt;/title>
    &lt;body>
           
    &lt;/body>
&lt;/oxyConcept>
```

New DITA XML elements are defined in our specific DITA XML vocabulary as follows:

There is a new &lt;part-term> XML element which must be used to tag various car parts.
There is a new &lt;product> XML element which must be used to tag product names.

Example:

The &lt;product>Hisense&lt;/product> &lt;part-term>engine&lt;/part-term> is more efficient. </codeblock>
        </section>
        <section id="section_t3d_hr4_jfc">
            <title>Conclusion</title>
            <p>You need to invest time in order to adapt the AI Positron add-on to generate better
                content for your particular project and organization particularities.</p>
            <p>By specifying your specific project particularities in a context prompt, content
                created and re-written by an AI engine can become much more precise and fit better
                with your existing ways of working. Some of your project's rules can be automated
                allowing you to also detect and fix such problems after the content is generated
                using the AI engine.</p>
            <p>An example of a detailed context prompt containing an overview of the project and
                audience, terminology, style rules, described vocabulary changes can be found <xref
                    href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/oxygenxml-incubator/ai-positron-assistant-samples/refs/heads/main/Custom%20Actions/ai-context-sample.md"
                    format="html" scope="external">here</xref>.</p>
        </section>
    </body>
</topic>
