<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="dita_map_metrics_evolution">
    <title>DITA Map Metrics Evolution</title>
  <prolog>
    <author>Radu Coravu</author>
    <critdates>
      <created date="2022-09-09"/>
    </critdates>
  </prolog>
    <body>
        <p>The <xref
        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/author-dita-map-transformation-scenarios.html"
        format="html" scope="external"><b>DITA Map Metrics Report</b></xref> transformation scenario
      available in Oxygen can be applied on a DITA Map and produce all kinds of interesting metrics
      for your DITA project:<ul id="ul_ugk_p34_55b">
        <li>The number of processed maps and topics.</li>
        <li>Content reuse percentage.</li>
        <li>Number of elements, attributes, words, and characters used in the entire DITAmap
          structure.</li>
        <li>DITA conditional processing attributes used in the DITA maps.</li>
        <li>Processing instructions.</li>
        <li>External links.</li>
        <li>All <codeph>@outputclass</codeph> attribute values gathered from the DITA project.</li>
      </ul>There is also an <xref href="https://github.com/oxygenxml/dita-ot-metrics" format="html"
        scope="external">open source DITA Open Toolkit plugin</xref> on the Oxygen XML GitHub
      organization which can be used to generate a metrics report either in HTML or XML format.</p>
    <p>If you generate metrics for various stages in the history of your DITA project (for example
      for various releases) you can combine those metrics and generate graphs which can show various
      indicators like:</p>
    <ul id="ul_tzp_rj4_55b">
      <li>Fluctuations in number of topics and maps.</li>
      <li>Fluctuations in content reuse.</li>
    </ul>
    <p>Metrics reports and metrics evolution reports are useful to get an overview of a DITA-based
      documentation project and to discuss its future directions. They are also useful indicators to
      discuss with management.</p>
    <p>Here are some steps to generate a metrics evolution report for a DITA project hosted on a Git
        server:<ol id="ol_vxf_1k4_55b">
        <li>Install this DITA Open Toolkit plugin which can publish DITA tables as SVG graphs: <xref
            href="https://github.com/oxygenxml/dita-table-svg" format="html" scope="external"
          />.</li>
        <li>Install the DITA Metrics report plugin in your DITA Open Toolkit installation (if not
          yet installed): <xref href="https://github.com/oxygenxml/dita-ot-metrics" format="html"
            scope="external"/>.</li>
        <li>Switch your Git project to various tagged versions, after each switch apply the
            <uicontrol>metrics-report-xml</uicontrol> transformation type on the DITA Map and
          generate an XML file representing the metrics for that particular version. As an example I
          created 4 metrics reports for 4 previous Oxygen XML User's Guide versions: <xref
            href="https://github.com/oxygenxml/dita-ot-metrics/tree/master/evolution/samples"
            format="html" scope="external"/>.</li>
        <li>Apply the <xref
            href="https://github.com/oxygenxml/dita-ot-metrics/blob/master/evolution/generateDITATables.xsl"
            format="html" scope="external">provided XSLT stylesheet</xref> to generate a DITA topic
          containing tables which show how various indicators change between versions.</li>
        <li>Apply the <uicontrol>DITA to HTML5</uicontrol> transformation on the topic to create an
          HTML document showing the <xref
            href="../resources/generated-metrics-evolution.html"
            format="html" scope="local">evolution of different indicators as a graph</xref>.</li>
      </ol></p>
      <foreign outputclass="html-embed"><![CDATA[
                <iframe width="100%" height="800" 
                  src="../resources/generated-metrics-evolution.html" 
                  frameborder="1">
                </iframe>
                ]]></foreign>
    </body>
</topic>
