<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="general_tips_and_tricks">
 <title>Tips And Tricks</title>
 <prolog>
  <author>Radu Coravu</author>
  <critdates>
   <created date="2020-02-04"/>
  </critdates>
 </prolog>
 <body>
  <p><ph keyref="oxygen"/> has about 18 years of development under its wings. During these years, we
   added lots of functionality and many of our users usually do not know more than 20-30% of
   Oxygen's features. So this presentation is intended for people using Oxygen and who may want to
   find out more about their tool.</p>
  <section id="section_gdt_dk3_ffb">
   <title>General Layout - Views and Toolbars:</title>
   <ul id="ul_gmy_rn5_nkb">
    <li>Side views and toolbars can be arranged by drag and drop. Views can be switched to the
     auto-hide mode to gain screen size.</li>
    <li>To hide all side views you can use the main menu <uicontrol>Window->Maximize Editing
      Area</uicontrol> action. Or you can maximize the editing area by double clicking on the tab of
     an opened XML document.</li>
    <li>To hide all toolbars you can use the main menu <uicontrol>Window->Hide all
      toolbars</uicontrol> action.</li>
    <li>You can also right-click in the toolbar area and use the <b>Configure Toolbars</b> action to
     see what toolbars are available or what toolbars can be removed.</li>
    <li>The <b>Symbols</b> toolbar is quite interesting if you often want to insert symbols that are
     not on the current keyboard.</li>
    <li>The entire layout of the views and toolbars can be saved (<uicontrol>Window->Export
      Layout</uicontrol>) and then shared with others (<uicontrol>Window->Load
     Layout</uicontrol>).</li>
   </ul>
  </section>
  <section id="section_bpy_jdz_rkb">
   <title>Side Views You Probably Never Used</title>
   <ul id="ul_nyz_ldz_rkb">
    <li>The <b>Information</b> view.</li>
    <li>The <b>Properties</b> view.</li>
    <li>The <b>Scratch Buffer</b> view.</li>
   </ul>
  </section>
  <section id="section_pwy_nd4_mfb">
   <title>Project-related Functionality:</title>
   <p>The Oxygen Project view is the place where you can organize and apply batch changes to all
    your resources:</p>
   <ul id="ul_shb_qd4_mfb">
    <li><xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/dita-main-files.html"
      format="html" scope="external">Master files support</xref>. Enable master files support in the
     project, add your top level XML documents as master files and any structure changes, renaming
     or moving files will automatically update all links in the Project. Also works for
     renaming/moving image resources.</li>
    <li><xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/preferences-storing.html"
      format="html" scope="external">Store options at project level.</xref> Almost all of Oxygen's
     preferences pages can be saved at project level. Once you do that, you can share the
      <b>project.xpr</b> file with somebody else and when they open it, they will also get the
     settings set inside the project. Transformation and validation scenarios can also be saved at
     project level.</li>
    <li>Compare files/folders by selecting them in the <b>Project</b> view, right click and using
     the <b>Compare...</b> popup menu action.</li>
    <li>Add references to multiple folders from various parts of your current file system and
     organize your work in one place.</li>
    <li><xref
      href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/using-the-project-view.html"
      format="html" scope="external">Batch operations</xref>: Select a folder in the project, right
     click and use the <uicontrol>Transform</uicontrol>, <uicontrol>Validate</uicontrol>,
      <uicontrol>Format and Indent</uicontrol>, <uicontrol>Find/Replace in Files</uicontrol>, or
      <uicontrol>Spell Check in Files</uicontrol>. Or use the <uicontrol>XML Refactoring</uicontrol>
     action to apply a refactoring stylesheet over all the selected files.</li>
    <li><xref
      href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/using-the-project-view.html"
      format="html" scope="external">Filter files</xref>. You can instruct the Project view to hide
     various file types.</li>
    <li>The <b>Image Preview</b> view will show the image current selected in the <b>Project</b>
     view.</li>
    <li>Open command prompt in a certain folder (right click on a folder, <uicontrol>Show
      in->Terminal</uicontrol>.</li>
    <li>Open the current selected file or folder in the system file browser (right click and choose
      <uicontrol>Show in->Finder</uicontrol>).</li>
   </ul>
  </section>
  <section id="section_uf1_ncs_gfb">
   <title>Navigation:</title>
   <p>Actions to find opened files, find files containing a certain content or navigate between
    files.</p>
   <ul id="ul_uwk_nnb_hhb">
    <li>In the main <uicontrol>Window</uicontrol> menu, you can find the <b>Next/Previous Editor</b>
     actions and their shortcuts. Together with the <b>Switch editor tab</b> action, these help you
     navigate between opened XML documents.</li>
    <li>The <b><xref
      href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/open-find-resource-dialog.html"
       format="html" scope="external">Open/Find Resource</xref></b> view (main menu <b>Window->Show
      View</b>) allows you to search for file names, search in file contents, or search for files
     containing comments or change tracking.</li>
    <li>Right-click the tab of an opened XML document and use the <b>Copy location</b> action. Or
     use the <b>Show in Explorer/Finder</b> action to locate the file.</li>
    <li>Use the main menu <b>File->Reopen last closed editor</b> action to re-open the last closed
     file.</li>
    <li>Use the <b>Navigation</b> toolbar to <b>Go back/forward/last modification</b>.</li>
    <li>
     <p>The main <b>Window</b> menu has actions to tile all opened XML documents and also to enable
      synchronous scrolling in them (useful if you want to look at similar XML documents and maybe
      to copy/paste between them).</p>
    </li>
   </ul>
  </section>
  <section id="section_d3n_xg3_ffb">
   <title>Find/Replace Functionality</title>
   <p>The Find/Replace functionality is the bread and butter of any editing application and Oxygen
    has lots of functionality in this regard:</p>
   <ul id="ul_xk3_zg3_ffb">
    <li><xref
      href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/find-and-replace-text-in-files.html"
      format="html" scope="external">Find/Replace in Files</xref>. <ul id="ul_fx2_fvz_3hb">
      <li>Restrict to XPath - If you want to make replacements only in certain parts of the XML
       document, the XPath restriction can be used to focus only on certain attributes or element
       content.</li>
      <li>Ignore Whitespaces - You should usually check this checkbox as there is always there is a
       possibility what the words you are searching for may be split on multiple lines in the XML
       content.</li>
     </ul></li>
    <li>The <b>Find</b> menu → <b>Find Next/Previous</b> actions allow you to find the next/previous
     occurrence of the current selected word(s). Or you can use the <b>Find All</b> action to find
     and highlight all occurrences of a word or a sequence of words.</li>
    <li>The <b>Find</b> menu → <b>Find all Elements</b> action shows a dialog box allowing you to
     find elements or attributes containing a sequence of words.</li>
    <li>The <b>Find</b> menu → <b>Quick find toolbar</b> is a compact toolbar giving you access to
     search functionality.</li>
    <li>The <b>XPath</b> toolbar allows you to use <b>XPath</b> expressions (i.e.
      <codeph>//comment()[contains(., 'TODO')]</codeph>) to search the current topic or a set of
     topics for elements, attributes, or comments matching a set of conditions.</li>
   </ul>
  </section>
  <section>
   <title>Text Editing:</title>
   <ul id="ul_s45_tn5_nkb">
    <li>You can use the mouse wheel or the <b>Ctrl + and Ctrl -</b> shortcuts to increase or
     decrease the font in the current opened XML document.</li>
    <li>The <b>Preferences->Editor / Edit Modes / Text</b> page allows you to wrap the visual line
     and show a print margin.</li>
    <li>
     <p><xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/code-templates-x-editing2.html"
       format="html" scope="external">Code templates</xref> can be used in order to define small
      code snippets which are often inserted. <xref
       href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/editor-variables.html" format="html"
       scope="external">Editor variables</xref> can be used inside those code templates and they
      will get expanded on insertion. Various useful editor variables:</p>
     <ul id="ul_anc_5n5_nkb">
      <li><codeph>${author.name}</codeph></li>
      <li><codeph>${selection}</codeph></li>
      <li><codeph>${ask('Author Name', generic, 'John Doe')}</codeph></li>
      <li><codeph>${xpath_eval(upper-case(substring('${cfn}', 1, 4)))}</codeph></li>
     </ul>
     <p>Code templates can also be saved at project level or exported in order to share them with
      others. You can read more about the contexts in which editor variables can appear in this blog
      post: <xref href="all_about_editor_variables.dita"/>.</p>
    </li>
    <li>Triple click an element tag to select the entire element.</li>
    <li><xref
      href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/text-navigate-document-content.html"
      format="html" scope="external">Various navigation shortcuts</xref>: Go after next tag. Select
     parent. Use the top level breadcrump.</li>
    <li>Move lines up and down (<b>Alt-Up/Down</b>).</li>
    <li>Click line number to select the entire line. </li>
    <li>Go to line/column (main menu <b>Find->Go to...</b>). </li>
    <li>Open file at cursor on references to navigate to referenced file or create new file
      (<b>Ctrl-ENTER</b>).</li>
    <li>Bookmarks (main menu <b>Edit->Bookmarks</b>).</li>
    <li>Quick find filter for side views (Outline, Entities, Transformation Scenarios).</li>
    <li>Drag/drop resources from a file browser or copy/paste to create links to the resources.</li>
    <li>Remove results of XPath execution.</li>
    <li>Use <xref
      href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/text-mode-actions.html"
      format="html" scope="external">contextual menu</xref> to: <ul id="ul_pvt_bp5_nkb">
      <li>Apply base 64/32 encoding or decoding to various parts of the XML document. (for example
       insert base 64 encoded images using the <b>data:image/png;base64,</b> protocol.</li>
      <li>Escape/unescape selection.</li>
      <li>Toggle comment.</li>
      <li>Indent selection.</li>
     </ul></li>
    <li>Split editor (main menu <b>Window->Split</b> actions) to copy paste between different parts
     of the XML document.</li>
    <li>Open an XML document in the <b>Text</b> editing mode, right click, choose <b>Go to
      definition</b> to open the DTD, XML Schema or RelaxNG Schema at the precise location where
     that XML element is defined.</li>
   </ul>
  </section>
  <section id="section_ify_v12_rkb">
   <title>Huge File Editing</title>
   <p>Huge XML and Text documents (Gigabytes) can be <xref
     href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/huge-file-editor.html" format="html"
     scope="external">opened and edited</xref> in the application.</p>
  </section>
  <section id="section_zjm_4lt_nkb">
   <title>Grid editing mode:</title>
   <ul id="ul_tdt_fp5_nkb">
    <li>The <uicontrol>Grid</uicontrol> editing mode is useful for looking at XML documents exported
     from data bases. </li>
    <li>You can use this mode to sort tables or to copy table data to Excel spreadsheets.</li>
    <li>The JSON editor also has a Grid editing mode.</li>
   </ul>
  </section>
  <section id="section_l1g_sg3_ffb">
   <title>Editing in the Author Visual Editing Mode</title>
   <p>
    <ul id="ul_idm_ch3_ffb">
     <li>Increase/decrease editor font - Use <b>Ctrl/CMD +/-</b> to increase or decrease the font in
      the current edited document.</li>
     <li>Inserting elements - Pressing ENTER in the Author visual editing mode will show you a list
      with all possible elements that can be inserted. If you choose an invalid element, Oxygen will
      find a place for it. You can also add <xref
       href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/the-content-completion-tab.html"
       format="html" scope="external">custom actions</xref> or code templates to the content
      completion list.</li>
     <li>Select content then press <b>ENTER</b> to surround the content in a new element.</li>
     <li>Select start tag of element, press <b>ENTER</b> to rename the element.</li>
     <li>Select multiple intervals - Press the <b>Ctrl/CMD</b> button when selecting text to select
      multiple text intervals. Once you do that, you can use toolbar actions like <b>Bold</b>,
       <b>Italic</b>, or <b>Underline</b> or you can use the <b>Edit Profiling Attributes</b> action
      to set profiling attributes on all the selected items.</li>
     <li>In-place attributes editor - Instead of using the <b>Attributes</b> view, you can press
       <b>Alt-Enter</b> to edit attributes for the current element in a small pop-up dialog
      box.</li>
     <li>Select an entire element - Triple-click inside an element's contents to select the entire
      element. After this, you can move the element to a new place.</li>
     <li>Double-click to select by word, then drag the mouse to select the content word by
      word.</li>
     <li>Move elements (especially paragraphs, list items) up or down (<b>ALT-UP/DOWN</b>), indent
      or unindent list items (<b>Tab</b>, <b>Shift-Tab</b>).</li>
     <li>Easily insert lists using framework specific auto correct support. Insert for example
       <b>1.</b> at the beginning of a paragraph, press the <b>Space</b> key and the inserted
      content becomes an ordered list. Or in a DITA topic at the beginning of a paragraph type
       <b>```java</b> and press space to insert a <xmlelement>codeblock</xmlelement>.</li>
     <li>Select content and then use the <b>Toggle comment</b> action (contextual menu
       <b>Refactoring</b> submenu) to quickly add an XML comment around it.</li>
     <li>In the <xref
       href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/author-contextual-menu.html"
       format="html" scope="external">contextual menu</xref> the <b>Text</b> submenu contains useful
      actions to count the number of words in the entire document (or in the selected text), convert
      the selection to upper, lowercase, or sentence case).</li>
     <li><xref
       href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/author-navigate-document-content.html"
       format="html" scope="external">Bookmarks</xref> - Click the vertical left side bar in the
      editing area to add a bookmark. Navigate to that bookmark even after the file has been closed
      using the <b>Ctrl/CMD + number</b> shortcut.</li>
     <li><xref
       href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/folding-author-mode.html"
       format="html" scope="external">Collapse other folds</xref> - Click a fold triangle in the
      Author visual editing mode and you can choose to close all other folds, useful when working
      with multiple sections in the same file.</li>
     <li>
      <p><xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/code-templates-x-editing2.html"
        format="html" scope="external">Code templates</xref> - Define small fragments of XML content
       that can be inserted either by defining a shortcut key or by pressing <b>ENTER</b> in the
       editing area.</p>
     </li>
     <li>
      <p><xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/editor-variables.html"
        format="html" scope="external">Editor variables</xref> - Certain Oxygen-specific macros can
       be automatically expanded. For example, a code template that inserts the current author name
       can use this editor
       variable:<codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;author>${author.name}&lt;/author></codeblock>or
       a code template that surrounds the selection inside a <xmlelement>keyword</xmlelement>
       element:<codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;keyword>${selection}&lt;/keyword></codeblock>or
       a code template that first asks the end user for their name and then inserts it in the
       document:<codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;author>${ask('Author Name', generic, 'John Doe')}&lt;/author></codeblock>Editor
       variables can also be used when creating <xref
        href="author-document-type-extension-sharing-custom-new-file-templates.dita">new file
        templates</xref>. You can read more about the contexts in which editor variables can appear
       in this blog post: <xref href="all_about_editor_variables.dita"/>.</p>
     </li>
     <li>Outline Quick find filter - The Outline view contains a filter that can be used to reduce
      the number of elements displayed in it (for example, display only the contained topics).</li>
     <li>The <uicontrol>Author</uicontrol> editing mode is best for editing bidirectional text with
      Arabic or Hebrew content.</li>
     <li>Editing MS Word and LibreOffice documents in the Author mode.</li>
    </ul>
   </p>
  </section>
  <section id="section_ecn_2k3_ffb">
   <title>Preferences:</title>
   <p>Oxygen has a lot of global settings that can be configured, I will just list what I consider
    to be the most important ones:</p>
   <ul id="ul_a1d_rp5_nkb">
    <li><xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/preferences-global.html"
      format="html" scope="external">Global</xref> - Change application language or show memory
     status.</li>
    <li><xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/preferences-appearance.html"
      format="html" scope="external">Appearance</xref> - Change the default color theme in Oxygen
     (the <b>Graphite</b> theme is quite popular).</li>
    <li><xref
      href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/preferences-application-layout.html"
      format="html" scope="external">Application Layout</xref> - impose custom layout or change
     editor tabs placement.</li>
    <li><xref
      href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/preferences-menu-shortcut-keys.html"
      format="html" scope="external">Menu shortcut keys</xref> - You can use this preferences page
     to assign or to see the shortcut for any action available in Oxygen.</li>
    <li><xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/preferences-fonts.html"
      format="html" scope="external">Fonts</xref> - This page allows you to change the default fonts
     used in the application. You can also see what font can be used for a certain set of
     characters.</li>
    <li><xref
      href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/preferences-editor-spell-check.html"
      format="html" scope="external">Spell check</xref> - Customize the spell checker settings, use
     custom spell check dictionaries.</li>
    <li><xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/preferences-external-tools.html"
      format="html" scope="external">External tools</xref> - Define various command line tools that
     you can launch from Oxygen.</li>
    <li><xref
      href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/preferences-content-completion-annotations.html"
      format="html" scope="external">Editor / Content Completion / Annotations</xref> - Disable the
     tooltips which appear when hovering over various elements (useful if you have a small
     screen).</li>
    <li><xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/preferences-editor-save.html"
      format="html" scope="external">Editor / Save</xref> - Settings to automatically save, recover
     content data on computer crash or to check for errors before saving the file.</li>
   </ul>
  </section>
  <section id="section_ism_qh2_rkb">
   <title>CSS-based PDF Publishing</title>
   <p>The embedded <uicontrol>Chemistry</uicontrol> engine can be used to publish any XML document
    to PDF using CSS to style the published output. There is a new transformation type <b>XML to PDF
     transformation using CSS</b> which can be used for this. The <uicontrol>CSS
     Inspector</uicontrol> view can be used to see what CSS styles get applied.</p>
  </section>
  <section id="section_edt_dk3_ffb">
   <title>Tools</title>
   <p>The <b>Tools</b> main menu is worth exploring. You can:<ul id="ul_thn_hq5_nkb">
     <li>Invoke XML refactoring actions.</li>
     <li>Open the SVG Viewer.</li>
     <li>Find various JSON-related tools.</li>
    </ul></p>
  </section>
  <section id="section_fdt_dk3_ffb">
   <title>Import - Convert</title>
   <ul id="ul_nn3_nq5_nkb">
    <li>The <b>File</b> menu offers the possibility to import HTML, CSV, Excel files, or database
     content as XML. </li>
    <li>For some XML frameworks like DITA, TEI, DocBook and XHTML you can use the <xref
      href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/smart-paste-support.html"
      format="html" scope="external">smart paste</xref> functionality.</li>
    <li>The <xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/batch-converter-addon.html"
      format="html" scope="external">Batch convertor add-on</xref> allows you to convert multiple
     HTML, Markdown, Excel files to DITA.</li>
   </ul>
  </section>
  <section>
   <title>Connectivity</title>
   <p>Oxygen comes bundled with an SVN client.</p>
   <p>You can also work with resources directly from <xref
     href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/webdav-connection.html" format="html"
     scope="external">WebDav repositories</xref>, <xref
     href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/configure-exist.html" format="html"
     scope="external">Exist</xref> and various other databases.</p>
   <p>There are also a couple of add-ons which add extra connectivity: <ul id="ul_pbj_lh5_nkb">
     <li><xref href="https://github.com/oxygenxml/oxygen-git-plugin" format="html" scope="external"
       >Git add-on</xref> for Oxygen.</li>
     <li><xref href="https://github.com/oxygenxml/oxygen-cmis-plugin" format="html" scope="external"
       >CMIS add-on</xref> for Oxygen.</li>
     <li><xref href="https://github.com/axxepta/project-argon" format="html" scope="external">BaseX
       add-on</xref> for Oxygen.</li>
    </ul></p>
  </section>
  <section id="section_gld_tbs_gfb">
   <title>Add-ons</title>
   <p>In the application main menu you can go to the main menu <uicontrol>Help->Install new
     Add-ons</uicontrol> and our official add-ons update site contains a couple of available
    add-ons. There are also other free add-ons provided by the Oxygen team that can be installed in
    an <xref href="https://github.com/search?q=topic%3Aadd-on+org%3Aoxygenxml&amp;type=Repositories"
     format="html" scope="external">Oxygen standalone version</xref>. </p>
   <p>I will enumerate some of the most popular interesting add-ons below:</p>
   <ul id="ul_xbw_ccs_gfb">
    <li><xref href="https://github.com/oxygenxml/oxygen-git-plugin" format="html" scope="external"
      >Git add-on</xref>. This plugin adds a side view allowing you to do some common Git operations
     like pull, commit, push (mostly 90% of what a regular Git user would do).</li>
    <li><xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/content-fusion-addon.html"
      format="html" scope="external">Content Fusion Connector add-on</xref>. Collaborate with your
     peers by sending them links that allow them to give you feedback on your work using a web
     browser without the need to pre-install anything on their side. </li>
    <li><xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/batch-converter-addon.html"
      format="html" scope="external">Batch convertor add-on</xref>. Converts multiple HTML,
     Markdown, Excel files to DITA.</li>
   </ul>
  </section>
  <section id="section_jdt_dk3_ffb">
   <title>Keeping in Touch</title>
   <ul id="ul_dlb_qbv_nkb">
    <li>Oxygen's <b>Help</b> menu allows you to use the <b>Report problem</b> action to contact us
     directly. </li>
    <li>The <b>Support Tools->Randomize XML Content</b> action allows you to randomize the content
     of an XML project before sending it to us for tests.</li>
    <li>And there are a lot of other ways to get in touch with us or to find various videos or
     tutorials to read: <xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/technical_support.html" format="html"
      scope="external"/>.</li>
   </ul>
  </section>
 </body>
</topic>
