<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="helping_the_dita_ot_project">
    <title>Helping the DITA OT Project as a Commercial Company</title>
  <prolog>
    <author>Radu Coravu</author>
    <critdates>
      <created date="2022-09-05"/>
    </critdates>
  </prolog>
    <body>
        <p>This small article is about the relationship between our company <b>Syncro Soft</b>
      (which produces the Oxygen XML tools) and the DITA Open Toolkit project.</p>
    <p> As a commercial company using the DITA Open Toolkit in multiple projects we try to base this
      relationship on:<ul id="ul_bwt_t1l_t5b">
        <li><b>Give and take.</b>
        </li>
        <li><b>Respect</b>.</li>
        <li><b>Growth</b>.</li>
      </ul>but as in any relationship there is probably always room for improvement.</p>
    <section id="section_gbp_1bl_t5b">
      <title>History and context</title>
      <p>We started integrating the <b>DITA Open Toolkit</b> in Oxygen about 14 years ago, some time
        around 2008 in Oxygen XML Editor version 10. The DITA Open Toolkit remains a very important
        part of the DITA editing and publishing solution provided by us.</p>
      <p>Currently we are using the DITA Open Toolkit publishing engine as a component in our Oxygen
        Publishing Engine in multiple projects:<ul id="ul_yfr_nbl_t5b">
          <li>Oxygen XML Editor</li>
          <li>Oxygen XML Author</li>
          <li>Oxygen XML Developer</li>
          <li>Oxygen Publishing Engine</li>
        </ul>and there will probably be more to come.</p>
    </section>
    <section id="section_h2n_sbl_t5b">
      <title>Implementing Plugins for the DITA Open Toolkit</title>
      <p>During these years we've implemented a number of commercial plugins for the DITA Open
        Toolkit, plugins bundled in the <xref
          href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/publishing_engine.html" format="html" scope="external"
          >Oxygen Publishing Engine</xref>.<ul id="ul_sc4_vbl_t5b">
          <li>DITA to WebHelp</li>
          <li>DITA to PDF-CSS</li>
          <li>DITA to Zendesk</li>
          <li>CodeBlock Syntax Highlight</li>
        </ul>And we also created a considerable number of open source DITA Open Toolkit plugins
        (about 23) available on the : <xref
          href="https://github.com/search?q=topic%3Adita-ot-plugin+org%3Aoxygenxml&amp;type=Repositories"
          format="html" scope="external">Oxygen GitHub organization</xref>, some of the most popular
        ones being:<ul id="ul_qty_fcl_t5b">
          <li>DITA Metrics Report</li>
          <li>Export DITA Map</li>
          <li>DITA Media Support</li>
          <li>DITA PDF Track Changes</li>
          <li>Embed PlantUML and Mermaid diagrams</li>
          <li>Embed Latex Equations</li>
        </ul></p>
      <p>These open source plugins are useful both for their original purpose but also as sample
        plugins for people wanting to implement something similar. We try to maintain the open
        source plugins (as time allows) and answer any questions related to them.</p>
    </section>
    <section id="section_l23_ycl_t5b">
      <title>Helping out with publishing related questions </title>
      <p>There are various <xref href="https://www.dita-ot.org/contributing" format="html"
          scope="external">channels</xref> on which people ask questions about DITA OT
          publishing:<ul id="ul_btn_k2l_t5b">
          <li><xref href="https://dita-users.groups.io/g/main" format="html" scope="external">DITA
              Users List</xref>.</li>
          <li><xref href="https://groups.google.com/g/dita-ot-users" format="html" scope="external"
              >DITA OT Users Google Group</xref></li>
          <li><xref href="https://github.com/dita-ot/dita-ot/discussions" format="html"
              scope="external">DITA OT Discussions List</xref></li>
          <li><xref href="http://slack.dita-ot.org/" format="html" scope="external">DITA OT Slack
              Channel</xref></li>
          <li><xref href="https://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/dita-ot" format="html"
              scope="external">Stack Overflow</xref></li>
        </ul></p>
      <p>There are also Oxygen specific channels:<ul id="ul_jxw_p3l_t5b">
          <li><xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/forum/" format="html" scope="external">Oxygen
              XML Forum</xref></li>
          <li><xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/mailinglists.html" format="html"
              scope="external">Oxygen Users List</xref></li>
        </ul></p>
      <p>As time allows we may help people with DITA Open Toolkit related questions on these
        channels. On the DITA Users List I've written more than 1000 messages during these 14
        years.</p>
    </section>
    <section id="section_pmn_jll_t5b">
      <title>DITA Open Toolkit Publishing-related Articles</title>
      <p>The <xref href="https://blog.oxygenxml.com" format="html" scope="external">Oxygen XML
          Blog</xref> has more than 20 DITA Open Toolkit publishing related articles.</p>
    </section>
    <section id="section_gsm_zfl_t5b">
      <title>Registering and analysing issues, opening pull requests</title>
      <p>Our general procedure when encountering DITA Open Toolkit bugs is to open issues for them
        on the DITA Open Toolkit list, if possible find time to analyse the issues, then propose
        workarounds or fixes.</p>
      <p>We are possibly the biggest contributor of bug and improvement requests to the DITA Open
        Toolkit. Most of these bugs and improvements are discovered by our end users and added by us
        on the DITA OT issues list. During these years we've opened <xref
          href="https://github.com/dita-ot/dita-ot/issues/created_by/raducoravu" format="html"
          scope="external">more than 400 issues</xref> on the DITA Open Toolkit project.</p>
      <p>In the last years we became a major contributor of pull requests which contain bug fixes
          (<xref
          href="https://github.com/dita-ot/dita-ot/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Aclosed+author%3Araducoravu"
          format="html" scope="external">about 60 contributed by me</xref>).</p>
    </section>
    <section id="section_iph_whl_t5b">
      <title>Contributing with improvement ideas to the DITA Open Toolkit project</title>
      <p>During these years we were contributed improvement ideas to the DITA Open Toolkit and were
        involved in the process in which they were implemented. Here are some of them:<ul
          id="ul_idb_b3l_t5b">
          <li>The DITA Open Toolkit Project file.</li>
          <li>Metadata to specify parameter names, descriptions and default values in the plugin
            descriptor files.</li>
          <li>Processing RelaxNG based DITA Maps and topics.</li>
        </ul></p>
    </section>
    <section id="section_s45_fhl_t5b">
      <title>Contributions to the DITA Open Toolkit documentation</title>
      <p>The <xref href="https://www.dita-ot.org/dev/" format="html" scope="external">DITA Open
          Toolkit documentation</xref> has relevant content for people who want to get started using
        and customizing the DITA Open Toolkit. We frequently help our users by giving them links to
        the DITA OT documentation.</p>
      <p>When necessary we contribute issues on the DITA Open Toolkit documentation issues list:
          <xref href="https://github.com/dita-ot/docs" format="html" scope="external"/>. </p>
    </section>
    </body>
</topic>
