<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="topic_h5b_n1p_kbc">
    <title>ISO 27001:2022 Certification Announcement</title>
    <shortdesc>Syncro Soft Achieves ISO 27001:2022 Certification, Reinforcing Our Commitment to
        Information Security.</shortdesc>
    <prolog>
        <author>Stefan Vasile</author>
        <critdates>
            <created date="2024-05-16"/>
        </critdates>
    </prolog>
    <body>
        <p>At Syncro Soft, we are happy to announce that our company has successfully achieved ISO
            27001:2022 certification, the most widely recognized international standard for
            information security management systems (ISMS).</p>
        <p>You can view our ISO 27001:2022 certificate <xref
                href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/legal/50745-SYNCRO-SOFT-SI2024.pdf" format="pdf"
                scope="external">here</xref>.</p>
        <section>
            <title>What is ISO 27001:2022?</title>
            <p>The ISO 27001:2022 standard provides a comprehensive framework for implementing,
                maintaining, and continually improving an ISMS within an organization. It
                establishes best practices for identifying, assessing, and mitigating potential
                risks to information security, ensuring the confidentiality, integrity, and
                availability of critical data.</p>
            <p>By adhering to the rigorous requirements set forth by ISO 27001:2022, Syncro Soft has
                demonstrated its ability to effectively manage and protect sensitive information,
                safeguarding the interests of our clients and stakeholders.</p>
            <p><b>The Benefits of ISO 27001:2022 Certification</b></p>
            <p>Achieving ISO 27001:2022 certification is a significant milestone for Syncro Soft, as
                it underscores our commitment to excellence in information security and brings
                numerous benefits to our customers and partners:</p>
            <ol id="ol_b1l_z2p_kbc">
                <li><b>Enhanced Data Protection</b>: With robust security controls and processes in
                    place, our clients can have confidence that their sensitive information is
                    protected against potential threats, such as unauthorized access, cyber-attacks,
                    or data breaches.</li>
                <li><b>Improved Risk Management</b>: The ISO 27001:2022 framework enables us to
                    identify, assess, and mitigate risks more effectively, ensuring that our
                    security measures are proactive and responsive to evolving threats.</li>
                <li><b>Compliance with Regulations</b>: By adhering to the stringent requirements of
                    ISO 27001:2022, Syncro Soft demonstrates compliance with various data protection
                    regulations, providing our clients with peace of mind and a competitive
                    advantage in their respective industries.</li>
                <li><b>Continuous Improvement</b>: The certification process mandates regular audits
                    and reviews, fostering a culture of continuous improvement within our
                    organization. This ensures that our security practices remain up-to-date and
                    aligned with industry best practices.</li>
                <li><b>Competitive Edge</b>: In today's increasingly digital landscape, where data
                    security is of paramount importance, our ISO 27001:2022 certification sets us
                    apart as a trusted and reliable partner, capable of delivering secure and
                    compliant software solutions.</li>
            </ol>
            <p>At Syncro Soft, we remain committed to upholding the highest standards of information
                security and protecting the interests of our clients. The achievement of ISO
                27001:2022 certification is a significant milestone in our journey, and we will
                continue to invest in security measures that ensure the confidentiality, integrity,
                and availability of sensitive data entrusted to us.</p>
            <p>For more information about our information security practices and ISO 27001:2022
                certification, please contact us.</p>
        </section>
    </body>
</topic>
