<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="migrateWordToDita">
  <title>How to Migrate from Word to DITA</title>
  <prolog>
    <author>Radu Coravu</author>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <keyword outputclass="label">Migrate</keyword>
      </keywords>
    </metadata>
  </prolog>
  <body>
    <p>The need for migrating Microsoft Office<tm tmtype="reg"/> Word documents to XML formats, and
      particularly to DITA, is quite a frequently encountered situation. As usual, migration from
      proprietary formats to XML is never perfect and manual changes need to be made to the
      converted content. However, the methods below should help you find the best approach for your
      particular case:</p>
    <section id="section_uzn_zry_dlb">
      <title>Oxygen Batch Documents Converter add-on</title>
      <p>The <xref href="https://github.com/oxygenxml/oxygen-resources-converter" format="html"
        scope="external">Oxygen Batch Documents Converter add-on</xref> can be installed in Oxygen and it allows
        you to convert one or more documents to various formats.</p>
      <p>The provided Word to DITA conversion of the add-on contains
        an option named <b>Create DITA maps from Word documents containing multiple sections</b>. 
        When this option is selected, all sections from your Word document marked by titles or headings will be separated 
        into individual DITA topics and referenced in a DITA map.</p>
    </section>
    <section id="method_1">
      <title>Smart Paste</title>
      <ol>
        <li>Open the Word document in MS Office, select all the content, and copy it.</li>
        <li>Open <b>Oxygen</b> and create a new <b>DITA</b> topic in the Author visual editing mode. </li>
        <li>Paste the selected content. Oxygen's <xref
          href="howSpecialPasteWorksInOxygen.dita">smart paste functionality</xref> will attempt to convert
          the content to DITA.</li>
      </ol>
    </section>
    <section id="method_2">
      <title>Word to HTML to DITA</title>
      <ol>
        <li>Save your MS Office Word document as HTML.</li>
        <li>Once you obtain that HTML, you have two possibilities:<p>
            <ul>
              <li>In <b>Oxygen</b>, Select <b>File</b>-><b>Import</b>-><b>HTML File</b> to import
                the HTML as XHTML. Then open the XHTML in Oxygen and in the "<b>Transformation
                  Scenarios</b>" view there should be four pre-configured transformation scenarios
                to convert <b>XHTML</b> to <b>DITA</b> topics, tasks, references, or concepts.</li>
              <li>Open the HTML file in any Web browser, select all of its content, and copy it.
                Then open <b>Oxygen</b>, create a new <b>DITA</b> topic in the Author visual editing
                mode, and paste the selected content. Oxygen's <xref
                  href="howSpecialPasteWorksInOxygen.dita">smart paste functionality</xref> will attempt to
                convert the HTML to DITA. </li>
            </ul>
          </p></li>
      </ol>
    </section>
    <section id="method_3">
      <title>Word to DocBook to DITA</title>
      <p>
        <ol>
          <li>Open the Word document in the free <b>Libre Office</b> application and save it as
              <b>DocBook</b>. </li>
          <li>Open the <b>DocBook</b> document in <b>Oxygen</b>.</li>
          <li>Run the predefined transformation scenario called <b>DocBook to DITA</b>. </li>
        </ol>
      </p>
    </section>
    <section id="method_4">
      <title>Word to DITA using DITA For Publishers</title>
      <p><ol>
          <li>If the Word document is in the new DOCX format you can open it in <b>Oxygen</b>'s
              <b>Archive Browser</b> view and then open the <b>document.xml</b> file contained in
            the archive.</li>
          <li>Run the predefined transformation scenario called <b>DOCX DITA</b>. This <b>ANT</b>
            scenario runs the following build file:
            OXYGEN_INSTALL_DIR/frameworks/dita/DITA-OT/plugins/net.sourceforge.dita4publishers.word2dita/build-word2dita.xml
            over the <b>DOCX</b> archive and should produce a <b>DITA</b> project that contains a
            DITA map and multiple topics. </li>
          <li>You may need to do some reconfiguring to map DOCX styles to DITA content. </li>
        </ol>Note: This method may also be helpful if you want to run it automatically with scripts,
        since it is based on the <b>DITA OT</b> and <b>Dita For Publishers</b> plugins.</p>
    </section>
  </body>
</topic>
