<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="migrating_to_dita">
  <title>Migrating Various Document Formats to DITA</title>
  <prolog>
    <author>Radu Coravu</author>
    <metadata>
      <keywords>
        <keyword outputclass="label">Migrate</keyword>
      </keywords>
    </metadata>
  </prolog>
  <body>
    <p>Most companies do not start new DITA-based projects from scratch. They already have content
      written in various other formats and somehow they need that content converted to DITA. In this
      blog post, I will offer some conversion advice depending on the format of your current
      project.</p>
    <section id="section_j23_k54_4gb">
      <title>Migrating DocBook Content to DITA.</title>
      <p>You can migrate one or multiple DocBook documents to DITA using the <b>Oxygen Resources
        Converter</b> add-on: <xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/batch-converter-addon.html"
          format="html" scope="external"/>.</p>
      <p>The <b>DocBook to DITA</b> conversion contains an option named <b>Create DITA maps from
          DocBook documents containing multiple sections</b>. When this option is selected, all
        sections from your DocBook document will be separated into individual DITA topics and
        referenced in a DITA map.</p>
    </section>
    <section id="section_bfz_z54_4gb">
      <title>Migrating Microsoft Word Content to DITA</title>
      <p>The Oxygen XML User Manual has a detailed topic enumerating the possibilities to convert
        Microsoft Word content to DITA: <xref
          href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/ooxml-to-dita.html" format="html"
          scope="external"/>.</p>
    </section>
    <section id="section_yx1_hv4_4gb">
      <title>Migrating Excel Content to DITA</title>
      <p>You can use Oxygen's <xref
          href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/smart-paste-support.html"
          format="html" scope="external"><i>Smart Paste</i></xref> functionality to copy content
        from an Excel spreadsheet and paste it inside an opened DITA topic. Also, as an alternate
        possibility, the <b>Oxygen Resources Converter</b> add-on was updated to be able to batch
        convert Excel to DITA: <xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/batch-converter-addon.html"
          format="html" scope="external"/>.</p>
    </section>
    <section id="section_p4y_nv4_4gb">
      <title>Migrating LibreOffice Content to DITA</title>
      <p>LibreOffice documents can be saved in Word format, and once you do that, you can convert
        the Word content to DITA as described above. Alternatively, you can save the LibreOffice
        documents to DocBook and then apply the DocBook to DITA conversion technique described
        above.</p>
    </section>
    <section id="section_cdq_wl2_5gb">
      <title>Migrating Google Docs to DITA</title>
      <p>You have three possibilities to convert Google Docs to DITA using Oxygen:<ul
          id="ul_e1s_yl2_5gb">
          <li>Copy/Pasting from Google Docs to a DITA Topic opened in Oxygen in the Author visual
            editing mode should work and convert the pasted content to DITA.</li>
          <li>Save the Google document as OpenDocumentFormat (<b>ODF</b>) then save the ODF document
            as <b>DocBook</b> with <b>Libre Office</b>, then apply the <b>DocBook to DITA</b>
            transformation scenario shipped in Oxygen to convert DocBook to DITA. </li>
          <li>Save the Google document as HTML then use the Oxygen batch converter add-on to convert
            it to DITA: <xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/batch-converter-addon.html"
              format="html" scope="external"/>.</li>
        </ul></p>
    </section>
    <section id="section_gdg_tv4_4gb">
      <title>Migrating Markdown Content to DITA</title>
      <p>The DITA Open Toolkit publishing engine bundled with Oxygen allows you to reference
        Markdown files directly in a DITA map and either publish them directly or export the
        Markdown files to DITA one by one: <xref
          href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/markdown-dita-2.html"
          format="html" scope="external"/>. If you want to convert multiple Markdown documents at
        once, you can use the <b>Oxygen Resources Converter</b> add-on: <xref
          href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/batch-converter-addon.html" format="html"
          scope="external"/>.</p>
    </section>
    <section id="section_ss1_gw4_4gb">
      <title>Migrating HTML Content to DITA</title>
      <p>Using Oxygen's <xref
          href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/smart-paste-support.html"
          format="html" scope="external"><i>Smart Paste</i></xref> functionality, you can open the
        HTML documents in a web browser, then copy the contents and paste it in a DITA topic opened
        in Oxygen's <b>Author</b> visual editing mode. If you want to convert multiple HTML files,
        you can use the <b>Oxygen Resources Converter</b> add-on: <xref
          href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/batch-converter-addon.html" format="html"
          scope="external"/>.</p>
    </section>
    <section id="section_imj_py4_4gb">
      <title>Migrating Unstructured FrameMaker to DITA</title>
      <p>There is a detailed blog post enumerating the possibilities to convert Unstructured
        FrameMaker content to DITA: <xref href="migratingFmToDita.dita"></xref>.</p>
    </section>
    <section id="section_cry_wy4_4gb">
      <title>Migrating MadCap Content to DITA</title>
      <p>Some recent MadCap versions seem to have facilities to export content directly to DITA.
        Otherwise, you will need to convert XHTML content to DITA with a custom XSLT stylesheet to
        preserve variable references.</p>
    </section>
    <section id="section_hpn_vrm_lsb">
      <title>Migrating Confluence Content to DITA</title>
      <p>To convert Confluence content to DITA, you can use the <b>Oxygen Resources Converter</b>
        add-on: <xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/batch-converter-addon.html" format="html"
          scope="external"/>.</p>
      <p>You first need to export the content to HTML. For this, log in to your Confluence account
        and navigate to the specific space that you want to export. Then go to <b>Space
          Settings</b><b>→Export space</b> and choose to export it as HTML. Then, back on
          <b>Oxygen</b>, you can then use the <b>Confluence to DITA</b> action (available once the
        add-on is installed) to convert the exported <filepath>index.html</filepath> file into a
        DITA map with topics.</p>
    </section>
    <section id="section_sgm_jvl_dtb">
      <title>Migrating LaTex to DITA</title>
      <p>You may use a third-party application (like <xref href="https://pandoc.org/" format="html"
          scope="external">Pandoc</xref>) to convert LaTex content to Word or HTML. Afterwards use
        the <b>Oxygen Resources Converter</b>: <xref
          href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/batch-converter-addon.html"
          format="html" scope="external"/></p>
    </section>
    <section id="section_zv4_hy4_4gb">
      <title>Migrating Other Formats to DITA</title>
      <p>You may find third-party applications (like <xref href="https://pandoc.org/" format="html"
          scope="external">Pandoc</xref>) that can convert your content to HTML or to some kind of
        XML format like DocBook. Once you have HTML or DocBook content, you can convert them to DITA
        using the advice above.</p>
    </section>
  </body>
</topic>
