<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="oxygen_desktop_security_data_integrity">
    <title>Oxygen XML Editor, Author, and Developer Desktop - Security and Data Integrity</title>
    <shortdesc>This article explains the main security and data integrity features in Oxygen XML
        Desktop applications and highlights the settings and best practices that help reduce risk
        when you work with content, add-ons, projects, and remote resources.</shortdesc>
    <prolog>
        <author>Radu Coravu</author>
        <critdates>
            <created date="2026-07-06"/>
        </critdates>
    </prolog>
    <body>
        <p>Users sometimes ask how secure the Oxygen XML Editor, Author, and Developer desktop
            applications are. This article explains the main security and data integrity aspects and
            describes the settings and practices that help reduce risk.</p>
        <p>Oxygen includes several layers of protection. Combined with careful user decisions, these
            protections help keep editing sessions safe and productive.</p>
        <section id="section_lqh_rl1_vjc">
            <title>Certifications</title>
            <p>Our company (Syncro Soft SRL) is <xref
                    href="ISO-27001-certification-announcement.dita"><b>ISO 27001:2022</b>
                    certified</xref>. This certification applies to our information security
                management system (ISMS), not to the Oxygen desktop applications themselves.</p>
            <p>We do not perform <b>SOC 2</b>-style penetration testing for Oxygen desktop
                applications because <b>SOC 2</b> is designed for service organizations and hosted
                platforms, not for locally installed desktop software. Oxygen desktop applications
                run on each user's machine, and users control both the edited content and the
                external resources that the application can access.</p>
        </section>
        <section id="section_omv_js1_vjc">
            <title>Third-Party Libraries</title>
            <p>Like most desktop applications, Oxygen includes a mix of open-source and commercial
                libraries. You can review them in the <menucascade>
                    <uicontrol>Help</uicontrol>
                    <uicontrol>About</uicontrol>
                </menucascade> dialog box. Over time, <b>Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures
                    (CVEs)</b> may be reported for libraries used by the application or by plugins
                built for it. We monitor these reports and decide how to respond based on their
                impact on the product:</p>
            <ul id="ul_mhh_rs1_vjc">
                <li>We may release updated application or plugin versions as soon as possible when
                    the risk is severe and exploitable.</li>
                <li>We may determine that a reported CVE does not affect Oxygen because the
                    vulnerable library code is not used or reachable in the product. In that case,
                    we publish <xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/security/advisories.html"
                        format="html" scope="external">security advisories</xref> and may update the
                    libraries in a later release.</li>
            </ul>
        </section>
        <section id="section_vvb_vm1_vjc">
            <title>Privacy</title>
            <p>By default, the application checks the Oxygen website to retrieve information about
                events such as new releases, conferences, and webinars. These checks do not transmit
                personal data or edited content. You can <xref
                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/privacy_options.html"
                    format="html" scope="external">disable</xref> these notification checks if
                needed.</p>
            <p>By default, Oxygen also allows you to install add-ons from the default update site.
                The same privacy settings can control this behavior.</p>
        </section>
        <section id="section_dzz_jn1_vjc">
            <title>Add-ons - Plugins</title>
            <p>You can install plugins in Oxygen by using the add-on installation support. During
                installation, Oxygen shows the add-on EULA and whether the add-on is signed. Oxygen
                provides many <xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-addons/" format="html"
                    scope="external">official add-ons</xref> that you can install. Do not install
                third-party add-ons from unverified or untrusted sources. Installed plugins run
                inside the Oxygen process and inherit its access rights, so they can modify files on
                your computer or run other processes.</p>
            <p>If an installed plugin causes Oxygen to become unresponsive in certain situations,
                uninstall it from the Oxygen <menucascade>
                    <uicontrol>Preferences</uicontrol>
                    <uicontrol>Plugins</uicontrol>
                </menucascade> page and contact the plugin vendor.</p>
            <p>Plugins may also add side views that let you open and save documents from external locations. Do not use these capabilities if you do not trust the plugin or the external storage system.</p>
        </section>
        <section id="section_k1y_xn1_vjc">
            <title>Add-ons - Frameworks</title>
            <p>You can install frameworks in Oxygen by using the add-on installation support.
                Frameworks add editing support for specific XML vocabularies. During installation,
                Oxygen shows the add-on EULA and whether the add-on is signed. Do not install
                third-party frameworks from unverified or untrusted sources. Java extensions
                included in frameworks run with the same user permissions as Oxygen itself, so they
                can modify files on your computer or run other processes.</p>
            <p>If an installed framework causes Oxygen to become unresponsive in certain situations,
                uninstall it from the Oxygen <menucascade>
                    <uicontrol>Preferences</uicontrol>
                    <uicontrol>Document Type Association</uicontrol>
                </menucascade> page and contact the framework vendor.</p>
        </section>
        <section id="section_c5c_d41_vjc">
            <title>Connections to Remote Servers</title>
            <p>Whenever Oxygen tries to open an HTTP or HTTPS connection to a remote server, it
                shows a dialog box asking whether the connection should be allowed. You can manage
                trusted hosts in the <xref
                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/trusted-hosts-settings.html"
                    format="html" scope="external">Trusted Hosts Preferences page</xref>.
                Connections to remote resources may retrieve unapproved content or send content to a
                server, so reject connections to sites that you do not trust.</p>
        </section>
        <section id="section_w1w_kvc_wjc">
            <title>Passwords/Secrets</title>
            <p>All passwords saved in the Oxygen preferences (for example passwords for HTTP WebDav
                connections or for Oxygen 29 values defined in the <b>Secrets</b> preferences page)
                are stored encrypted specifically for the current user and cannot be exported or
                shared with others. </p>
        </section>
        <section id="section_zxp_x41_vjc">
            <title>Project-Level Settings</title>
            <p>Most Oxygen preference pages can be saved at project level and shared with a team.
                When you open an Oxygen project XPR file that contains custom settings, Oxygen
                notifies you about them. Do not approve and apply custom settings from an XPR file
                that comes from an untrusted source.</p>
        </section>
        <section id="section_tz1_dp1_vjc">
            <title>Untrusted Content</title>
            <p>You may receive XML documents and related files, such as XSLT stylesheets, from other
                people. In general, do not open documents from untrusted sources. Oxygen includes
                built-in protections against many well-known XML processing vulnerabilities. Some of
                these protections are available as settings in the <xref
                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/preferences-xml-parser.html"
                    format="html" scope="external">XMLParser Preferences page</xref>. If Oxygen asks
                for permission to connect to an external website while you process or edit untrusted
                content, allow the connection only if you trust the site.</p>
        </section>
        <section id="section_fv4_lq1_vjc">
            <title>Data Integrity</title>
            <p>Oxygen tries to protect the content that you are editing, including unsaved changes,
                in the event of an <b>application crash</b>. In the Oxygen <xref
                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/preferences-editor-save.html"
                    format="html" scope="external"><menucascade>
                        <uicontrol>Preferences</uicontrol>
                        <uicontrol>Editor / Save</uicontrol>
                    </menucascade></xref> page, settings such as <uicontrol>Safe save</uicontrol>
                and <uicontrol>Save auto-recover information</uicontrol> are enabled by default.</p>
            <p>If the application crashes while you are editing a document and then restarts, it
                should allow you to <xref
                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/auto-recover-feature.html"
                    format="html" scope="external">recover the edited content</xref>.</p>
            <p>If XML documents declare one XML encoding but encode certain characters differently
                the application <xref
                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/preferences-encoding.html"
                    format="html" scope="external">reports an error</xref> and does not proceed to
                load the document by default.</p>
        </section>
        <section id="section_pvk_zq1_vjc">
            <title>Out of Memory</title>
            <p>Oxygen starts with a maximum amount of memory allocated to the application. You can
                see the current maximum in the <menucascade>
                    <uicontrol>Help</uicontrol>
                    <uicontrol>About</uicontrol>
                </menucascade> dialog box. You can also <xref
                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/increase-memory.html"
                    format="html" scope="external">increase the maximum amount of memory allocated
                    to Oxygen</xref>.</p>
            <p>The application includes several features that help avoid out-of-memory situations:</p>
            <ul id="ul_hsp_gr1_vjc">
                <li><xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/editing-large-documents.html" format="html" scope="external">Optimizations and restrictions</xref> when loading very large files.</li>
                <li>Lazy loading of files reopened with a project in the
                        <uicontrol>Project</uicontrol> view. Oxygen first loads only the currently
                    selected files and loads other files when you select their tabs.</li>
                <li>Starting with Oxygen 29, when available memory becomes critically low, the
                    application shows a warning and unloads the content of open documents while
                    keeping their tabs. The documents are automatically reloaded when you select
                    their tabs.</li>
            </ul>
        </section>
        <section id="section_usk_zr1_vjc">
            <title>Getting Help</title>
            <p>If you use an active Oxygen desktop license for a version that is not in the <xref
                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/eol.html" format="html" scope="external"
                    >end-of-life</xref> stage, you can <xref
                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/technical_support.html" format="html"
                    scope="external">contact us through several support channels</xref> for advice
                or help related to unstable or unsafe application behavior. You can also use the
                Oxygen <menucascade>
                    <uicontrol>Help</uicontrol>
                    <uicontrol>Report problem</uicontrol>
                </menucascade> dialog box to report problems, including potential security
                issues.</p>
        </section>
    </body>
    <related-links>
        <link href="https://youtu.be/U4hb2_OhEMs" format="html" scope="external">
            <linktext>YouTube video - Oxygen XML Editor, Author, and Developer Desktop - Security
                and Data Integrity</linktext>
        </link>
    </related-links>
</topic>
