<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="oxygen_xml_as_a_technical_documentation_solution_faq">
    <title>Oxygen XML As a Technical Documentation Solution FAQ</title>
    <shortdesc>This topic covers some of the most frequent questions we get from technical
        documentation writer teams willing to investigate the <b>Oxygen XML</b> set of tools as a
        possible solution for writing and publishing content.</shortdesc>
    <prolog>
        <author>Radu Coravu</author>
        <critdates>
            <created date="2024-01-26"/>
        </critdates>
    </prolog>
    <body>
        <dl id="dl_gdg_wwf_f1c">
            <dlentry>
                <dt>What does Oxygen XML provide as a tool to a technical documentation team?</dt>
                <dd>
                    <p>Oxygen is a <b>DITA XML</b> desktop editing tool that can be used by
                        technical documentation writers to <b>write</b>, <b>reuse</b>, and
                            <b>publish</b> DITA XML content to a variety of output formats, such as
                            <b>WebHelp Responsive</b> and <b>PDF</b>.</p>
                    <p>Some of our strong capabilities are listed <xref
                            href="oxygen-dita-strong-points.dita">here</xref>.</p>
                </dd>
            </dlentry>
            <dlentry>
                <dt>To which companies would you recommend a DITA XML based solution for writing
                    technical documentation?</dt>
                <dd>I would recommend the use of the DITA XML standard for writing technical
                    documentation with Oxygen XML as an editing tool to companies that have one of
                    the following conditions fulfilled:<ul id="ul_ef1_wbn_f1c">
                        <li>They have multiple similar products and want to take advantage of DITA
                            XML high reuse capabilities and condition profiling/filters to produce
                            multiple similar, but not identical, manuals from the same project.</li>
                        <li>They want to add structure-based validation rules that must be followed
                            by all members of a team.</li>
                        <li>They want to create their own custom vocabulary of semantic
                            elements.</li>
                        <li>Besides web-based outputs, they also want to produce PDFs and want to
                            have a relatively high degree of control over the PDF
                            customization.</li>
                    </ul></dd>
            </dlentry>
            <dlentry>
                <dt>Is Oxygen a Content Management System?</dt>
                <dd>
                    <p><b>Oxygen</b> is not a <b>content management system</b>, we do not store the
                        content that you are editing on our side. </p>
                    <p>Our clients use <b>Oxygen XML</b> for collaboration on a technical
                        documentation project in one of these ways:</p>
                    <ul id="ul_scc_cxf_f1c">
                        <li>We have clients who use Oxygen's <xref
                                href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/git-addon.html"
                                format="html" scope="external"><b>Git client add-on</b></xref> to
                            collaborate on the same project using a <xref
                                href="../git-tech-writers/using_git_for_technical_writing.dita">Git
                                repository</xref>.</li>
                        <li><b>Oxygen</b> also has built-in support for working with <xref
                                href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/sharepoint-connection.html"
                                format="html" scope="external"><b>SharePoint</b></xref> repositories
                            if you want to store the edited content on <b>SharePoint</b>.</li>
                        <li>There are commercial <b>CMSs</b> (content management systems) that have
                            integrations with <b>Oxygen</b>. Some of them are listed <xref
                                href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/partners.html#cmssolutionpartners"
                                format="html" scope="external">here</xref>. These commercial content
                            management systems such as <b>Astoria</b>, <b>Bluestream</b>,
                                <b>Componize</b> usually have plugins that allow <b>Oxygen</b> to
                            connect to the <b>CMS</b> remote storage, open documents, edit and save
                            them back. But the price of the commercial content management systems is
                            separate from the price of an <b>Oxygen</b> license.</li>
                    </ul>
                </dd>
            </dlentry>
            <dlentry>
                <dt>What Oxygen products should I buy for our technical documentation team?</dt>
                <dd>All of our prices are transparently available <xref
                        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/buy.html" format="html" scope="external"
                        >here</xref>. <p>The usual purchase suggestion for a technical writer's team
                        is something like this:</p><p>
                        <ul id="ul_b5l_yxf_f1c">
                            <li>
                                <p>One permanent user-based license of Oxygen XML Editor
                                    Professional: <xref
                                        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/buy_new_licenses_professional_smp.html"
                                        format="html" scope="external"/>.</p>
                                <p>This one license would be for the person who is in charge of
                                    customizing the published output as well as writing content.</p>
                            </li>
                            <li>
                                <p>A permanent license of Oxygen XML Author professional for each
                                    full time tech writer: <xref
                                        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/buy_new_licenses_author_professional_smp.html"
                                        format="html" scope="external"/>.</p>
                                <p>The <b>Oxygen XML Author</b> allows writers to visually edit
                                        <b>DITA XML</b> content and to publish it to <b>WebHelp</b>,
                                        <b>PDF</b>, and other formats.</p>
                            </li>
                            <li>
                                <p>Any other occasional contributor or reviewer (subject matter
                                    experts or engineers, for example) can use our Content Fusion
                                    platform to give feedback on the content directly from a web
                                    browser. </p>
                                <p>A video of how <b>Content Fusion</b> Works: <xref
                                        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/content_fusion/take_a_tour.html"
                                        format="html" scope="external"/>.</p>
                                <p>And the pricing, depending on the number of people who would
                                    simultaneously review the content: <xref
                                        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/content_fusion/buy_content_fusion.html"
                                        format="html" scope="external"/>.</p>
                            </li>
                        </ul>
                    </p></dd>
            </dlentry>
            <dlentry>
                <dt>What type of customer support and training will I get from the Oxygen team?</dt>
                <dd>
                    <p>We help customers with advice and any problems they encounter when using our
                        application. </p>
                    <p>For example, if you want to create your own publishing customizations, these
                        are usually done using CSS. You would have one colleague on your side
                        creating the customization and asking us questions along the way. We do not
                        implement full customizations for you, but we guide you along the way.</p>
                    <p>As for training, we have lots of videos and online resources for learning to
                        use Oxygen to produce technical documentation: <xref
                            href="learnDita.dita"/>.</p>
                    <p>We can offer you a one-time web meeting to show you how Oxygen works in
                        general, but if you want a more rigorous training, we have partners like
                        Ryffine or Mekon who offer such courses: <xref
                            href="learnDita.dita#learnDita/section_rqq_nhj_4jb"/>.</p>
                </dd>
            </dlentry>
            <dlentry>
                <dt>How can I convert my current content to DITA XML?</dt>
                <dd>You can find advice about how to convert various document formats to DITA XML
                        <xref
                        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/dita-migrating-various-formats.html"
                        format="html" scope="external">here</xref>. For any other document format,
                    the advice is to possibly try to export it to HTML content and then use the free
                    Oxygen <b>Batch Documents Converter</b> add-on.</dd>
            </dlentry>
            <dlentry>
                <dt>Do you have case studies or references from companies who are successfully using
                    Oxygen? </dt>
                <dd>Some of our customers who have agreed to be officially listed are mentioned
                    here: <xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/customers.html" format="html"
                        scope="external"/>.</dd>
                <dd>Also some testimonials: <xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/case_studies.html"
                        format="html" scope="external"/>.</dd>
            </dlentry>
        </dl>
    </body>
</topic>
