<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="similarities_tech_docs_soft_engs">
    <title>Similarities Between Technical Doc Writers and Software Engineers</title>
    <prolog>
        <author>Radu Coravu</author>
        <critdates>
            <created date="2023-10-19"/>
        </critdates>
    </prolog>
    <body>
        <p>I'm a software engineer, working for Oxygen XML Editor along side my colleagues in
            developing tools used by technical documentation writers. I also do lots of technical
            support and sometimes I write small blog posts like this one or update our technical
            documentation. </p>
        <p>Over time, I've come to view the aspects of a technical writer's job (especially a tech
            writer who is using standards that have lots of potential for reuse, like DITA XML)
            quite similar to many of the aspects of a software developer's job. So I started putting
            together a list of concepts and the way in which both of these jobs (which may seem
            incompatible with each other at first) would utilize such concepts.</p>
        <p>
            <table frame="all" rowsep="1" colsep="1" id="table_xlq_sn5_yyb">
                <tgroup cols="3">
                    <colspec colname="c1" colnum="1" colwidth="1*"/>
                    <colspec colname="newCol2" colnum="2" colwidth="2*"/>
                    <colspec colname="c2" colnum="3" colwidth="2*"/>
                    <thead>
                        <row valign="top">
                            <entry id="entry_vyh_qcx_dzb">Concept</entry>
                            <entry>Software Engineers</entry>
                            <entry>Tech Docs Writer</entry>
                        </row>
                    </thead>
                    <tbody>
                        <row valign="top" id="row_qyb_4xw_dzb">
                            <entry id="entry_yyh_qcx_dzb">Accessibility</entry>
                            <entry>We build our software products by following accessibility best
                                practices, we test our products using screen readers and collaborate
                                with our vision-impaired users to fix accessibility problems. We
                                also try to make sure there is enough color contrast in the
                                application components and icons, that all font sizes are
                                configurable and ship various color themes for the
                                application.</entry>
                            <entry>Published technical documentation also needs to be accessible,
                                for example by adding alternate text for images and using relevant
                                text for links. It's also important to make sure the color theme of
                                the published output has enough contrast. <xref
                                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-webhelp-responsive/topics/whr-accessibility.html"
                                    format="html" scope="external">WebHelp</xref> and PDF outputs
                                obtained using Oxygen from DITA XML content are section 508
                                compliant.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row valign="top" id="row_wyb_4xw_dzb">
                            <entry id="entry_bzh_qcx_dzb">Accurate and Concise Messages</entry>
                            <entry>We are required to present accurate and concise error messages,
                                dialogs, and prompts to our end users. Over time, we've learned to
                                pass most of these error messages by our tech docs writers, asking
                                their opinion to help improve them.</entry>
                            <entry>The technical documentation must also be accurate and concise.
                                The technical writer's advice can also greatly benefit the software
                                developers when they work in developing the messages in the
                                application.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row>
                            <entry>Balance between Time and Impact</entry>
                            <entry>Time is a precious commodity, as an engineer I need to make the
                                best of the time I have allocated in order to implement a certain
                                feature or functionality or to refactor content. If time does not
                                allow me to perform a full redesign of a certain functionality I can
                                still gradually improve it.</entry>
                            <entry>The tech docs writer may also not have enough time to refactor
                                for example the entire project in a certain way but can gradually
                                work towards a certain direction.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row valign="top" id="row_xyb_4xw_dzb">
                            <entry id="entry_czh_qcx_dzb">Building Complex Systems from Basic
                                Building Blocks</entry>
                            <entry>We build small components (classes) and then we use them to build
                                projects. We then use the many individual projects to build entire
                                large products. <p>We keep the small components as simple as
                                    possible to maximize their reuse potential. With these simple
                                    components, we build large complex projects.</p></entry>
                            <entry>Publications are built by using small topics of information or
                                small reusable elements like notes or tables. Even larger
                                publications can be built by combining the DITA maps used to
                                describe subcomponents of the product. <p>Individual topics/tasks
                                    are small, simple, and easy to follow. With these simple topics,
                                    you can build large technical documentation
                                projects.</p></entry>
                        </row>
                        <row valign="top" id="row_yyb_4xw_dzb">
                            <entry id="entry_ezh_qcx_dzb">Code Review</entry>
                            <entry>We have a stage where the code that was written by someone is
                                reviewed by a usually more experienced peer. The code reviewer may
                                propose various changes, either small message changes or changes
                                from the point of view of someone who knows the architecture of the
                                project better. There is also the possibility for a novice to code
                                review, as this exposes them to new techniques and they also can
                                give a fresh perspective on things.</entry>
                            <entry>Having experienced technical writers review the work of novice
                                writers is a great way to acclimate the novice writers to a specific
                                way that the content must be written for a certain company.
                                Experienced tech writers can also, for example, better determine if
                                the content should be placed somewhere else in the project or if the
                                current topic should be split into multiple ones as they have a
                                better overall overview of the project.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row valign="top" id="row_zyb_4xw_dzb">
                            <entry id="entry_fzh_qcx_dzb">Content Reuse</entry>
                            <entry>We reuse entire small projects in multiple products. We reuse
                                libraries, classes, and functions. Content reuse gives us the
                                ability to build products faster and to build different products
                                from the same content.</entry>
                            <entry>Similarly, starting from the top down, entire DITA maps can be
                                joined together to create documentation for larger publications,
                                topics can be used in multiple places in a DITA map, and elements
                                like notes, tables, lists can be reused in multiple places.<p>Useful
                                        links:<ul id="ul_zdm_tfj_bzb">
                                        <li><xref href="../presentation-reuse/introduction.dita"
                                                >DITA Reuse Strategies</xref></li>
                                        <li><xref
                                                href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/dita/styleguide/c_Content_Re-use.html"
                                                format="html" scope="external">DITA Style
                                                Guide</xref></li>
                                    </ul></p></entry>
                        </row>
                        <row>
                            <entry>Copy/Paste vs Reuse</entry>
                            <entry>
                                <p>Sometimes I may decide that it's in the best interest of the
                                    project I'm working on to copy/paste instead of reusing. </p>
                                <p>I may prefer copy/pasting for example in order not to introduce
                                    dependencies between modules or when using incompatible data
                                    formats.</p>
                                <p>I may create auto tests to notify you when the source of truth
                                    has changed.</p>
                            </entry>
                            <entry>It's best to reuse as much as possible but sometimes the writer
                                may decide that copy/pasting and then maybe making small adjustments
                                is a better decision.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row valign="top" id="row_azb_4xw_dzb">
                            <entry id="entry_gzh_qcx_dzb">Custom Validation Rules</entry>
                            <entry>We have various automatic tools (like <b id="b_rpq_pw4_dzb"
                                    >Sonar</b>) that report warnings when certain best practices for
                                writing the code are not followed. This gives us more consistency as
                                we are many devs working on the same code base and the code we
                                produce needs to be easily read, understood, and maintained by
                                others.</entry>
                            <entry>Using <xref href="SchematronBCs.dita" format="dita">Schematron
                                    Rules</xref>, technical writers also can impose custom
                                validation rules, specific for their project. These custom
                                validation rules ensure consistency throughout the tech docs
                                project.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row valign="top" id="row_bzb_4xw_dzb">
                            <entry id="entry_izh_qcx_dzb">Deleting Unused/Deprecated Content</entry>
                            <entry>All mature software products contain components that in time may
                                become unmaintained or unused. Over time, such components may become
                                security problems or may just contain inaccurate information. So,
                                software developers also spend time deprecating and then removing
                                these components.</entry>
                            <entry>Technical documentation also may contain content that is no
                                longer accurate or topics that refer to features that no longer
                                exist. So, deleting unused content is also a part of a tech writer's
                                job.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row valign="top" id="row_czb_4xw_dzb">
                            <entry id="entry_jzh_qcx_dzb">Document my Code/Documentation</entry>
                            <entry>Most programming languages have support to add comments
                                containing documentation about what the code does and why various
                                choices were made. This documentation gives more information that
                                could not be derived just by reading the code. We also have internal
                                wikis with diagrams and descriptions of various architecture choices
                                and steps to set up various projects for people who just started
                                working on them.</entry>
                            <entry>It's a best practice to try <xref href="styleguide.dita"/> where
                                various best practices and architectural decisions for the
                                documentation project are described. Such a Style Guide makes
                                on-boarding easier and over time, the rules in the style guide may
                                start to be automatically applied using Schematron or a terminology
                                checker. Publishing customizations should also be documented in a
                                style guide and a quick getting started tutorial for people who
                                start working on the specific technical documentation project may
                                also be useful.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row valign="top" id="row_dzb_4xw_dzb">
                            <entry id="entry_kzh_qcx_dzb">Enjoy</entry>
                            <entry>For the long term, it's good to find particular aspects about
                                your job that you particularly enjoy doing. For example, in my case
                                I've always been interested in investigating why certain bugs occur
                                and following through, spending hours to investigate and solve them.
                                I'm also very eager to delete unused code and functionality.</entry>
                            <entry>Whether it's rewriting/correcting problems in existing content,
                                writing new content, adding custom validation rules, helping others,
                                discussing with engineers, or improving the architecture of the
                                existing technical documentation project, technical writers may also
                                have preferred activities. In general, we get to know what each
                                person does best within the team and who to ask for advice in
                                certain cases.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row valign="top" id="row_ezb_4xw_dzb">
                            <entry id="entry_mzh_qcx_dzb">Evolve</entry>
                            <entry>We need to constantly deepen our understanding of the current
                                techniques we use, learn new techniques, and new frameworks or
                                programming languages. Learning new things also helps us to obtain a
                                different view of the current techniques we are using.</entry>
                            <entry>By reading various resources like the <xref
                                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/dita/styleguide/" format="html"
                                    scope="external">DITA Style Guide</xref>, the <xref
                                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/dita/1.3/specs/" format="html"
                                    scope="external">DITA 1.3 standard</xref>, or the <xref
                                    href="welcome.dita">Oxygen XML Blog</xref>, a technical writers
                                can deepen their understanding of the used standard, what features
                                it offers, and what best practices to follow. <p>There are lots of
                                    useful resources about approaching technical documentation
                                    online like: <xref href="https://diataxis.fr/" format="html"
                                        scope="external">Diátaxis</xref>. And various <xref
                                        href="learnDita.dita#learnDita/section_lhf_cjj_2v">community
                                        places</xref> where one can ask for help or follow up on
                                    conversations.</p><p>Sometimes, technical writers also become
                                    involved in styling the published HTML or PDF outputs, in
                                    uploading the deliverables to the proper places on the web site,
                                    producing training material, or receiving user feedback and
                                    integrating it back in the documentation. So, they move towards
                                    scripting and being power-users.</p></entry>
                        </row>
                        <row valign="top" id="row_fzb_4xw_dzb">
                            <entry id="entry_nzh_qcx_dzb">Helping Yourself</entry>
                            <entry>When I do not know how to do something, I first try to figure
                                things out on my one before asking for help. I use various internal
                                resources (our internal wiki) or external resources like Google,
                                ChatGPT, StackOverflow. I always tend to remember the solution
                                better if I put some effort into finding it myself.</entry>
                            <entry>Overcoming obstacles by oneself is possible if the company has
                                internal wikis or internal style guides that the technical writers
                                can use. By helping ourselves, experienced writers develop a certain
                                grit that allows them to overcome daily obstacles.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row valign="top" id="row_gzb_4xw_dzb">
                            <entry id="entry_ozh_qcx_dzb">Inversion of Control</entry>
                            <entry>Most of the time, we use libraries developed by us or by others
                                to build larger projects. So, our code uses other code. But there
                                are frameworks like <b id="b_hqq_pw4_dzb">Java Spring</b> that have
                                this concept of <b id="b_iqq_pw4_dzb">inversion of control</b>. With
                                this concept, our code does not use libraries, but those libraries
                                in turn orchestrate and use our code.</entry>
                            <entry>The DITA XML standard has the concept of <xref
                                    href="../keyscopes/keyscopesBlog.dita">key scopes</xref>, which
                                allows key references and content key references in topics to have
                                different values depending on where the topic is referenced in the
                                DITA map. So in a way, your topics contain variable place holders
                                that may expand to different content depending on where they are
                                used in the DITA Map.<p>The DITA XML standard also has this concept
                                    of <xref href="../presentation-reuse/conref_push.dita">content
                                        reference push</xref>. With conref push content can be
                                    placed in a topic from the outside.</p><p>A DITA topic that
                                    contains key references is not truly instantiated until it's
                                    referenced in a certain place in the DITA map.</p></entry>
                        </row>
                        <row>
                            <entry id="entry_pzh_qcx_dzb">Issues/Tickets List</entry>
                            <entry>We work internally mostly with <b id="b_mtf_v1x_dzb">Atlassian
                                    JIRA</b> to create issues/tickets. We have various workflows for
                                our issues that allow us to have quality assurance, and
                                documentation connected to the same issue ID. The issue connects all
                                the commits and modifications made both in the development phase and
                                in the documentation phase. So, looking at an issue, I can also see
                                links to all changes made to fix and document the issue.<p>For some
                                    projects, we also work with GitHub issues or GitLab
                                    issues/tickets and although more simple, they also provide us
                                    with some basic way of keeping track of work
                                progress.</p></entry>
                            <entry>An issues/tickets list is also very important for tech doc
                                writers to keep track of what needs to be done.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row valign="top" id="row_hzb_4xw_dzb">
                            <entry id="entry_qzh_qcx_dzb">Learn by Teaching</entry>
                            <entry>Teaching is a great way to learn more about the concepts
                                yourself. You do not need to be highly experienced in a subject
                                matter in order to make small presentations in the team about it. I
                                sometimes make small presentations to start discussions about the
                                subject matter and gather best practices from other team members who
                                now more about the subject matter than I do.</entry>
                            <entry>You can read about an aspect of a standard like <b
                                    id="b_yvh_dp3_dzb">DITA XML</b> that you are not using in the
                                company (for example, about <xref
                                    href="../branchFilters/branchFilter.dita">branch
                                    filtering</xref> or <b id="b_gxp_dp3_dzb">relationship
                                    tables</b>), make a small presentation in the team, and then try
                                to start a discussion about how the feature could be used in the
                                tech docs project and what problems it could solve.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row valign="top" id="row_izb_4xw_dzb">
                            <entry id="entry_rzh_qcx_dzb">Managing Dependencies/Linking between
                                objects</entry>
                            <entry>The more dependencies a class, object, or project has, the more
                                difficult is to use it in another context. In our work, we try to
                                uncouple objects, to decrease the dependencies between them to be
                                able to reuse the objects in multiple contexts.</entry>
                            <entry>There are various <xref href="dita_linking_stretegies.dita"
                                    >linking strategies</xref>, the main idea being to avoid direct
                                references between topics and instead use indirect links and
                                relationship tables. This gives you more flexibility to re-use
                                topics in multiple contexts.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row id="row_jzb_4xw_dzb">
                            <entry id="entry_szh_qcx_dzb">Metadata/Extensibility</entry>
                            <entry>From the point of view of a Java developer like myself, support
                                for annotations was added to the Java programming language about 20
                                years ago and it allowed the creation of various important libraries
                                that in a way extend the language to offer all kinds of useful
                                functionality. </entry>
                            <entry>The DITA XML standard has various ways that users can enhance the
                                publishing or add metadata that is useful for specific needs:<ul
                                    id="ul_ld1_xq3_dzb">
                                    <li>Using the <xref
                                            href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/dita/1.3/specs/langRef/base/metadata.html"
                                            format="html" scope="external"
                                                ><xmlelement>metadata</xmlelement></xref> element
                                        and sub-elements to define key words, index terms,
                                        categories that can be used to add various publishing
                                        features. The Oxygen WebHelp output uses keywords to enhance
                                        the search functionality and index terms to create and index
                                        page.</li>
                                    <li>The <xmlatt>outputclass</xmlatt> attribute can be set on
                                        almost all DITA elements and allows you to easily customize
                                        elements using CSS in the published output. For example, you
                                        can use it to specify the <xref
                                            href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/add-syntax-highlights-codeblocks-x.html"
                                            format="html" scope="external">language</xref> of
                                        codeblock elements.</li>
                                    <li>The <xmlelement>foreign</xmlelement> element allows adding
                                        non DITA XML content and can be used for various
                                        enhancements like <xref
                                            href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/dita-embed-html.htm"
                                            format="html" scope="external">embedding HTML
                                            content</xref> directly in DITA topics.</li>
                                    <li>The <xmlelement>data</xmlelement> element can be used almost
                                        anywhere to specify key value pairs that are later used in
                                        the published output.</li>
                                    <li>The DITA XML standard itself can be specialized or
                                        restricted using a <xref
                                            href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/dita-integrate-specialization.html"
                                            format="html" scope="external">specific
                                        procedure</xref>.</li>
                                </ul><p>This possibility to extend the standard makes it much more
                                    valuable and allows targeting specific company
                                needs.</p></entry>
                        </row>
                        <row valign="top" id="row_kzb_4xw_dzb">
                            <entry id="entry_tzh_qcx_dzb">No Appreciation for Fluff</entry>
                            <entry>The written code should be as compact and easy to read as
                                possible. An application's features should again be intuitive to use
                                with a user's interface that does not present more than you need to
                                accomplish a certain task.</entry>
                            <entry>Small topics describing key concepts, small tasks describing how
                                various things can be accomplished. Precise messages, simplified
                                English, no fancy words, no thesaurus.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row valign="top" id="row_lzb_4xw_dzb">
                            <entry id="entry_uzh_qcx_dzb">Obtaining multiple products from the same
                                code base</entry>
                            <entry>Using configuration files, we can reuse an entire product code
                                base to create multiple products, each with a specific subset of
                                features.</entry>
                            <entry>Using profiling/filters or multiple main DITA maps, a DITA XML
                                based project can be used to create user guides for <xref
                                    href="../presentation-reuse/reuseSimilarProducts.dita">multiple
                                    products</xref>.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row valign="top" id="row_mzb_4xw_dzb">
                            <entry id="entry_vzh_qcx_dzb">One trick pony / Jack of all
                                trades</entry>
                            <entry>Even if over time we specialize and become very productive with
                                one set of tools and when working on a certain aspect of the
                                application, having a larger overview and being able to use other
                                tools/languages/frameworks when necessary gives us lots of
                                flexibility to help members of other teams or to make changes to
                                sub-projects that we are not directly involved in.</entry>
                            <entry>Being able to write documentation in multiple formats (Markdown,
                                DITA XML, MS Word), being able to use various version control
                                systems like Git or content management systems gives you the ability
                                to apply for and be able to perform any technical documentation job,
                                besides the benefit of using much of the workflows and tools other
                                people in the company might use.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row valign="top" id="row_nzb_4xw_dzb">
                            <entry id="entry_wzh_qcx_dzb">Overview of Complex Systems</entry>
                            <entry>Either when making a small improvement or implementing a large
                                feature, having an overview of the entire project's architecture
                                helps a lot.</entry>
                            <entry>Having an overview of the documentation project helps you know
                                where to make a change, what pleasant or unpleasant side effects it
                                generates and how to possibly re-structure the content to facilitate
                                making that change. Content reuse adds a lot of efficiency to the
                                process of building a user's guide and reusing large chunks of
                                content between user manuals. Content reuse unfortunately also
                                sometimes makes it easier to propagate errors in multiple
                                places.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row valign="top" id="row_ozb_4xw_dzb">
                            <entry id="entry_xzh_qcx_dzb">Pair Programming</entry>
                            <entry>We have this concept that we apply from time to time in which two
                                people work on the same issue from the same computer. These people
                                can be peers with the same knowledge, in which case one of them
                                thinks about the larger context in which the issue is resolved and
                                asks questions while the other implements it. Or the engineers can
                                be an expert and a novice, in which case the novice directly sees
                                how the expert considers and implements the issue.</entry>
                            <entry>I'm not sure if in the domain of tech docs writing people use
                                such pair docs writing but I think it could also benefit a novice to
                                see exactly how people with more experience organize themselves,
                                understand the requirements, and work on issues.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row valign="top" id="row_pzb_4xw_dzb">
                            <entry id="entry_yzh_qcx_dzb">Project Structure and Naming
                                Resources</entry>
                            <entry>Experienced software developers are interested in properly naming
                                things. We try to give good names to functions, variables, and
                                packages. We try to be consistent when naming things using compound
                                names, either using hyphens or upper-lower-case sequences.</entry>
                            <entry>It makes sense for technical documentation writers to also have
                                best practices when it comes to a project's structure, how files
                                should be named, where images should be stored, how key names should
                                be given, and so on. <xref
                                    href="https://github.com/oxygenxml/dita-project-best-practices"
                                    format="html" scope="external">Sample Project</xref>.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row valign="top" id="row_qzb_4xw_dzb">
                            <entry id="entry_zzh_qcx_dzb">Publishing Orchestration</entry>
                            <entry>We have various automated flows that generate nightly build
                                installation kits for our product that can be further tested by the
                                QA team.</entry>
                            <entry>Although the published output can be obtained from an Oxygen
                                installation by running a transformation scenario, over time it's a
                                good idea to automate the publishing by using an integration server
                                like Jenkins, for example, to constantly poll the user guide project
                                for modifications and update an internal web site with the latest
                                HTML or PDF outputs to show how the documentation is evolving and
                                give material to engineers who want to review the published content.
                                For the Oxygen XML blog, for example, a <xref
                                    href="welcome.dita#welcome/section_cbc_g11_qkb">Gradle build
                                    file</xref> is used to automate the publishing.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row valign="top" id="row_rzb_4xw_dzb">
                            <entry id="entry_a13_qcx_dzb">Read the Docs</entry>
                            <entry>We learn a lot by doing, or by copy pasting or reusing content
                                from other similar projects that we have. But sometimes taking the
                                time to read the documentation for the frameworks and libraries that
                                we use is really worth it.</entry>
                            <entry>By reading the <xref
                                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/dita/1.3/specs/" format="html"
                                    scope="external">DITA 1.3 standard documentation</xref>, for
                                example, a technical documentation writer might find various
                                features that can be used in their project. They might also
                                understand certain limitations in the way things work. <p>There are
                                        <xref href="learnDita.dita">lots of resources</xref> for
                                    learning DITA or for learning how to better use Oxygen to edit
                                    DITA XML content. So, it is sometimes worth taking the time to
                                    explore the tools you are using and the capabilities of the
                                    standard.</p></entry>
                        </row>
                        <row valign="top" id="row_szb_4xw_dzb">
                            <entry id="entry_b13_qcx_dzb">Requesting Help from Peers</entry>
                            <entry>Besides an internal wiki of content and procedures, we rely on a
                                network of colleagues, some from our teams, some from others or from
                                the system admins team. Over time, we come to know each other's
                                strengths and know who to call when we need advice. Helping someone
                                else usually takes priority over the current task. </entry>
                            <entry>Besides asking their peers for help, technical documentation
                                writers also have various engineers and subject matter experts who
                                could help when writing content either by giving feedback or by
                                providing some initial content (some notes for example) to be used
                                for the official documentation.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row valign="top" id="row_tzb_4xw_dzb">
                            <entry id="entry_c13_qcx_dzb">Security</entry>
                            <entry>We do our best to protect our applications from security
                                vulnerabilities by updating old libraries and by considering various
                                scenarios in which attackers would attempt to gain control over an
                                application. </entry>
                            <entry>Besides keeping the user guide contents in a secure location to
                                avoid exposing information to the competition or features that have
                                not yet been released, the HTML output obtained from the user guide
                                contents also needs to be updated to contain the latest Javascript
                                libraries and not be susceptible to vulnerabilities when loaded in a
                                web browser.<p>Content in the user's guide in general also needs to
                                    be considered from the point of view of not giving an attacker
                                    details about how the product could be configured for use in
                                    other scenarios other than the ones intended by the
                                    developers.</p></entry>
                        </row>
                        <row valign="top" id="row_uzb_4xw_dzb">
                            <entry id="entry_d13_qcx_dzb">Server Side Validation</entry>
                            <entry>Validation and automated tests run on the server side (we use a
                                Jenkins integration server) whenever changes are made to source code
                                for a certain project. If automatic tests fail, emails are sent to
                                the people who have committed the latest changes that broke the
                                builds.</entry>
                            <entry><p>Whenever you have multiple topic files, filters, or content
                                    reuse, you may end up with potential validation problems in the
                                    edited content, problems ranging from broken links to invalid ID
                                    attribute values or invalid topics.</p>Oxygen has a very useful
                                    <xref
                                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/scripting_oxygen_dita_validate_and_check_for_completeness.html"
                                    format="html" scope="external"><b id="b_ftb_bw4_dzb">Validate
                                        and check for completeness</b></xref> action that checks
                                lots of potential problems in the context of a DITA map, but maybe
                                not all people run such an action before they commit. Such an action
                                can also be <xref
                                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/scripting_oxygen_dita_validate_and_check_for_completeness.html"
                                    format="html" scope="external">scripted</xref> to run on the
                                server side in an integration server like <b id="b_wbh_kw4_dzb"
                                    >Jenkins</b>, for example.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row valign="top" id="row_vzb_4xw_dzb">
                            <entry id="entry_e13_qcx_dzb">Terminology</entry>
                            <entry>There are lots of ways that a message can be conveyed. All
                                messages presented to the end user need to have a certain style,
                                tone, and use plain language.</entry>
                            <entry><xref href="checking_terminology_with_oxygen_xml_editor.dita"
                                    format="dita">Controlled terminology</xref> is also an important
                                aspect of a technical writer's job.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row valign="top" id="row_wzb_4xw_dzb">
                            <entry id="entry_f13_qcx_dzb">Translation</entry>
                            <entry>In general, all user interface strings in an application will be
                                translated to multiple languages so we need to take this into
                                account when designing the application.</entry>
                            <entry>A DITA XML project that needs to be translated into multiple
                                languages also needs to follow a <xref
                                    href="translating_your_dita_project.dita" format="dita">sequence
                                    of best practices</xref>.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row valign="top" id="row_xzb_4xw_dzb">
                            <entry id="entry_g13_qcx_dzb">User's Point of View</entry>
                            <entry>All features need to be discussed and implemented from the point
                                of view of the people who will actually benefit from using them. For
                                technical people, this is sometimes difficult to do but we try to
                                constantly remind ourselves to implement features that help certain
                                real-world workflows to be performed by the end user and not for the
                                sake of closing tickets. </entry>
                            <entry>The documentation also needs to target certain user profiles and
                                be written to help people perform tasks and understand concepts. The
                                product knowledge level of the end user is almost never the same as
                                that of the tech writer.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row id="row_yzb_4xw_dzb">
                            <entry id="entry_h13_qcx_dzb">User Feedback</entry>
                            <entry>It's important to get feedback from end users. This feedback
                                gives us ideas about what to implement in the future and also allows
                                us to modify existing features to better accommodate certain
                                workflows. So, we try to make it as easy as possible to give
                                feedback, we have a <b id="b_g1m_myw_dzb">Report problem</b> action
                                directly in the application, we have a support email address, a
                                forum, user's list, and on each of our user's manual pages, there is
                                also a feedback comments section.</entry>
                            <entry>Receiving user feedback for the written documentation is also
                                very important to improve the documentation to cover the actual user
                                needs. For example, the <xref
                                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/oxygen_feedback.html"
                                    format="html" scope="external">Oxygen Feedback platform</xref>
                                can be easily embedded in the generated web pages to allow users to
                                provide feedback related to the documentation. We use it for the
                                Oxygen user's manual, blog, and it's a very good mechanism to get in
                                touch with users and to improve the docs.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row valign="top" id="row_zzb_4xw_dzb">
                            <entry id="entry_i13_qcx_dzb">User Interface</entry>
                            <entry>An application may work very well from the functionality point of
                                view but if it does not look very nice (ugly color theme, ugly
                                icons, not intuitive user interface layouts) it will not end up
                                getting used very much. </entry>
                            <entry>A published user's guide also needs to have appropriate colors
                                and fonts to improve readability and find ability. So, besides the
                                actual content care, decisions must also be made in terms of what
                                font styles and sizes to use, or what color theme to
                                implement.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row valign="top" id="row_a1c_4xw_dzb">
                            <entry id="entry_j13_qcx_dzb">Version Control</entry>
                            <entry>We use a mix of Git repositories and Subversion repositories for
                                our software projects. Version control allows us to collaborate, to
                                have a history of changes, and to have release branches for our
                                products.</entry>
                            <entry>Using a version control system like Git similarly gives the
                                possibility to collaborate on documentation projects with various
                                    <xref
                                    href="../git-tech-writers/using_git_for_technical_writing.dita"
                                    >workflows</xref>. <p>As an alternative, you can use a
                                    commercial content management system or in the cloud editing
                                    solution.</p><p>No matter what storage system you use to
                                    collaborate, having a history of changes and release branches is
                                    a must.</p></entry>
                        </row>
                        <row valign="top">
                            <entry id="entry_k13_qcx_dzb">Working with AI tools</entry>
                            <entry>Developers can work with ChatGPT to ask advice about how to write
                                various pieces of code, especially in programming languages that
                                they are not familiar with. They can also ask for help re-writing
                                messages or translating small pieces of content.</entry>
                            <entry>Working directly with AI tools or using an add-on like the <xref
                                    href="ai_positron.dita">Oxygen AI Positron Assistant
                                view</xref>, tech doc writers can also use the AI tools to improve
                                readability, remove grammar problems, re-write content in various
                                styles, or translate content. So, AI tools are valuable for writers
                                as co-pilots.</entry>
                        </row>
                    </tbody>
                </tgroup>
            </table>
        </p>
        <p>Writers and software engineers have lots of things in common because we are all working
            with language and we communicate in a specific language. Computer programming languages
            contain less words and are more simple than the English vocabulary, but in the end we
            are all in the market of describing, expressing, and building large systems using simple
            terms.</p>
        <p>If you have feedback about these concepts and how they influence your writing, it is as
            usual, welcomed.</p>
    </body>
</topic>
