<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="startup_dita_project">
    <title>Startup DITA Project</title>
    <prolog>
        <author>Radu Coravu</author>
        <critdates>
            <created date="2021-05-17"/>
        </critdates>
    </prolog>
    <body>
        <section id="section_bvx_ghj_qpb">
            <p>The <xref href="https://github.com/oxygenxml/DITA-Startup-Project" format="html"
                    scope="external">Startup DITA Project</xref> contents are useful for starting a
                new DITA project with <ph keyref="oxygen"/> version 23.0 or newer, using
                collaboration version control systems such as <b>Git</b> or <b>Subversion</b>. </p>
            <p>When the <codeph>project.xpr</codeph> is open in the <uicontrol>Project</uicontrol>
                view, it imposes a custom set of options, as well as an imposed custom DITA
                framework extension.</p>
        </section>
        <section id="section_cvx_ghj_qpb">
            <title>Project Structure</title>
            <p>The project contains the following folder structure:</p>
            <ul id="ul_dvx_ghj_qpb">
                <li><codeph>custom-settings/frameworks</codeph> - Contains custom <xref
                        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/framework-customization-script.html"
                        format="html" scope="external">DITA and DITA Map framework
                    extensions</xref>.</li>
                <li><codeph>custom-settings/learned-words</codeph> - Contains learned words for the
                    English dictionary.</li>
                <li><codeph>filters</codeph> - This initially empty folder can be updated to contain
                        <xref
                        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/dita-ditaval-file.html"
                        format="html" scope="external">DITAVAL Filter files</xref> used to profile
                    the DITA content when publishing.</li>
                <li><codeph>images</codeph> - Contains images used in the DITA project.</li>
                <li><codeph>oxygen-term-checker</codeph> - Contains a <xref
                        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/terminology-checker-addon.html"
                        format="html" scope="external">terminology file</xref> with an example
                    rule.</li>
                <li><codeph>publishing</codeph> - Contains a <xref
                        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/dita_open_toolkit_project.html"
                        format="html" scope="external">DITA-OT project file</xref> and a <xref
                        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/whr-publishing-template-2.html"
                        format="html" scope="external">publishing template</xref>.</li>
                <li><codeph>reusables</codeph> - Contains various reusable components. For example,
                    in the "reusable_components.dita" topic, you can add various DITA elements (such
                    as notes, paragraphs, lists, and list items) that are reused in various places
                    in the project. See <xref
                        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/eppo-create-conref.html"
                        format="html" scope="external">more about reusing DITA content</xref>.</li>
                <li><codeph>topics</codeph> - Contains all the DITA topics in the project.</li>
            </ul>
        </section>
        <section id="section_evx_ghj_qpb">
            <title>Settings Saved at Project Level</title>
            <p>Most of the preference pages in <menucascade>
                    <uicontrol>Options</uicontrol>
                    <uicontrol>Preferences</uicontrol>
                </menucascade> can be saved at <xref
                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/sharing-projects.html"
                    format="html" scope="external">project level</xref>. When the project is open in
                the <wintitle>Project</wintitle> view, the following options are imposed:</p>
            <ul id="ul_fvx_ghj_qpb">
                <li>The <uicontrol>Editor</uicontrol> / <uicontrol>Spell Check</uicontrol>
                    preferences page is saved at project level with automatic spell checking
                    enabled.</li>
                <li>The <uicontrol>Editor</uicontrol> / <uicontrol>Spell Check</uicontrol> /
                        <uicontrol>Dictionaries preferences</uicontrol> page is saved at project
                    level and all <xref
                        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/learned-words.html"
                        format="html" scope="external">learned words</xref> are saved in the
                        <filepath>custom-settings/learned-words/en.tdi</filepath> file.</li>
                <li>The <uicontrol>Editor</uicontrol> / <uicontrol>Edit Modes</uicontrol> /
                        <uicontrol>Author</uicontrol> preferences page is saved at project
                    level.</li>
                <li>The <uicontrol>DITA</uicontrol> / <uicontrol>Maps</uicontrol> preferences page
                    is saved at project level.</li>
                <li>The <uicontrol>Document Type Association</uicontrol> preferences page disables
                    certain framework configurations that are not useful (e.g. <b>DocBook
                    5</b>).</li>
                <li>The <uicontrol>Document Type Association</uicontrol> /
                        <uicontrol>Locations</uicontrol> preferences page references two custom
                    framework configurations that are described further.</li>
            </ul>
        </section>
        <section id="section_gvx_ghj_qpb"><title>Framework Customizations</title><p>The editing
                environment for <b>DITA Maps</b> and <b>Topics</b> can be customized by extending
                their current frameworks. </p><p>The framework extension for editing <b>DITA
                    Topics</b> is defined in the
                    <filepath>custom-settings/frameworks/dita-extension/dita-extension.exf</filepath>
                <xref
                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/framework-customization-script-usecases.html"
                    format="html" scope="external">framework script file</xref>. You can add your
                own custom actions to the toolbars, menus, or contextual menus, and add, change, or
                remove transformation scenarios or validation scenarios.</p><ul id="ul_hvx_ghj_qpb">
                <li>
                    <p>You can customize the existing <xref
                            href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/customizing-templates.html"
                            format="html" scope="external">DITA Topic file templates</xref> by
                        making changes to the
                            <filepath>custom-settings/frameworks/dita-extension/templates/</filepath>
                        folder.</p>
                </li>
                <li>
                    <p>The content completion configuration extension file
                            <filepath>custom-settings/frameworks/dita-extension/resources/cc_config_ext.xml</filepath>
                        allows you to <xref
                            href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/rendering-elements-cc-author.html"
                            format="html" scope="external">customize various aspects</xref> of the
                        content completion feature. </p>
                </li>
                <li>
                    <p>You can add <xref href="SchematronBCs.dita">custom Schematron validation
                            rules</xref> in the
                            <filepath>custom-settings/frameworks/dita-extension/resources/customRules.sch</filepath>
                        Schematron file.</p>
                </li>
                <li>
                    <p>You can also <xref href="customizeDITACSS.dita">customize the visual
                            editing</xref> by modifying the CSS
                            <filepath>custom-settings/frameworks/dita-extension/css/custom.css</filepath>.</p>
                </li>
            </ul>The framework extension for editing <b>DITA Maps</b> is defined in the
                <filepath>custom-settings/frameworks/dita-map-extension/dita-map-extension.exf
                </filepath><xref
                href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/framework-customization-script-usecases.html"
                format="html" scope="external">framework script file</xref> and can me customized in
            a similar way. You can customize the existing <xref
                href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/customizing-templates.html"
                format="html" scope="external">DITA Map file templates</xref> by making changes to
            the <filepath>custom-settings/frameworks/dita-map-extension/templates/</filepath>
            folder.</section>
        <section id="section_ivx_ghj_qpb">
            <title>Renaming/Moving Topics and Other Resources</title>
            <p>The project has a logical folder named <codeph>Main Files</codeph> with a reference
                to the main DITA map. This enables the <xref
                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/dita-main-files.html"
                    format="html" scope="external"><i>Main Files</i></xref> support in the project,
                allowing you to rename or move files while the references to those files are
                automatically updated.</p>
        </section>
        <section id="section_jvx_ghj_qpb">
            <title>Terminology Checking</title>
            <p>For checking terminology, you can use the Oxygen <xref
                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/terminology-checker-addon.html?"
                    format="html" scope="external">Terminology Checker add-on</xref>. You can add
                terminology rules to the <filepath>oxygen-term-checker</filepath> folder. For
                example, the Oxygen user manual uses a set of Vale rules to check for <xref
                    href="https://github.com/oxygenxml/userguide/tree/master/DITA/oxygen-term-checker"
                    format="html" scope="external">common terminology problems</xref>.</p>
        </section>
        <section id="section_kvx_ghj_qpb">
            <title>Publishing</title>
            <p>You can publish the content of the <codeph>project.ditamap</codeph> in two ways:</p>
            <ul id="ul_lvx_ghj_qpb">
                <li>You can open the DITA-OT project file named <codeph>publish-project.xml</codeph>
                    from the <filepath>publishing</filepath> subfolder and two predefined publishing
                    scenarios become available. You can read more about DITA-OT project files <xref
                        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/dita_open_toolkit_project.html"
                        format="html" scope="external">in the user manual</xref>.</li>
                <li>You can also open the <codeph>project.ditamap</codeph> file in the DITA Maps
                    Manager view, invoke the "Configure Transformation Scenario(s)" dialog box, and
                    in the Project section, there are two predefined transformation scenarios (one
                    for WebHelp, the other for PDF) that use the publishing template archived in the
                    zip file. <xref
                        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/events/2018/webinar_creating_custom_publishing_templates_for_webhelp_and_pdf_output.html"
                        format="html" scope="external">This past webinar</xref> shows more details
                    about creating and customizing a publishing template. </li>
            </ul>
        </section>
        <p>Starting with <ph keyref="oxygen"/> version 24, the <uicontrol>Startup DITA
                Project</uicontrol> will be available as a new project template in the <menucascade>
                <uicontrol>Project</uicontrol>
                <uicontrol>New Project</uicontrol>
            </menucascade> dialog box. If you want to try it with <ph keyref="oxygen"/> version 23
            you should download the project template (<codeph>.zxpr</codeph> file) from the project
                <xref href="https://github.com/oxygenxml/DITA-Startup-Project/releases"
                format="html" scope="external">releases page</xref> and <xref
                href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/versions/23.1/ug-editor/topics/create-your-own-templates.html#create-your-own-templates"
                format="html" scope="external">set it as a new document template</xref>.</p>
    </body>
</topic>
