<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="types_of_companies_which_would_benefit_from_the_dita_xml_standard">
    <title>Types Of Companies Which Would Benefit from the DITA XML Standard</title>
    <prolog>
        <author>Radu Coravu</author>
        <critdates>
            <created date="2023-12-31"/>
        </critdates>
    </prolog>
    <body>
        <p>I would divide in general the companies which benefit from using DITA XML for their
            technical documentation needs in three large sections:</p>
        <dl id="dl_rtq_yb1_h1c">
            <dlentry>
                <dt>Companies Creating Physical Products</dt>
                <dd>
                    <p>These companies create real-world objects, be them cars, refrigerators or
                        computer chips. Each version of each product has an unique product ID and
                        needs to be documented. Different products are sometimes similar in
                        functionality but they also have some differences.</p>
                </dd>
            </dlentry>
            <dlentry>
                <dt>Companies Creating Version-ed Software Products</dt>
                <dd>
                    <p>These companies provide software components which are version-ed and usually
                        get installed on the client's side. As each client may have an older version
                        of the product, user manuals for older versions need to be made
                        available.</p>
                </dd>
            </dlentry>
            <dlentry>
                <dt>Companies Creating Version-less Software Products</dt>
                <dd>
                    <p>These companies usually provide cloud based services, the end user receives
                        always access to the latest stable release, there is no user manual made
                        available for past releases.</p>
                </dd>
            </dlentry>
        </dl>
        <p>The benefits for companies would be the following:<table frame="all" colsep="1"
                rowsep="1">
                <title>Benefits</title>
                <tgroup cols="4">
                    <colspec colname="c1" colnum="1" colwidth="1*"/>
                    <colspec colname="newCol4" colnum="2" colwidth="1*"/>
                    <colspec colname="newCol2" colnum="3" colwidth="1*"/>
                    <colspec colname="newCol3" colnum="4" colwidth="1*"/>
                    <thead>
                        <row>
                            <entry morerows="1">Benefits</entry>
                            <entry namest="newCol4" nameend="newCol3">Company Types</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row>
                            <entry>Physical Products</entry>
                            <entry>Version-ed Software Products</entry>
                            <entry>Version-less Software Products</entry>
                        </row>
                    </thead>
                    <tbody>
                        <row>
                            <entry>Take advantage of <b>DITA XML</b> high reuse capabilities and
                                condition profiling/filters to produce multiple similar, but not
                                identical, manuals from the same project.</entry>
                            <entry>Produce manuals for similar components.</entry>
                            <entry>Produce user manuals for similar types of software
                                products.</entry>
                            <entry>Produce user manuals for similar types of software
                                products.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row>
                            <entry>Add structure-based validation rules that must be followed by all
                                members of a team.</entry>
                            <entry>Use common validation and terminology rules for the entire
                                team.</entry>
                            <entry>Use common validation and terminology rules for the entire
                                team.</entry>
                            <entry>Use common validation and terminology rules for the entire
                                team.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row>
                            <entry>Create custom vocabulary of semantic elements.</entry>
                            <entry>Useful to add specific semantic meaning to content specific for
                                the company.</entry>
                            <entry>Useful to add specific semantic meaning to content specific for
                                the company.</entry>
                            <entry>Useful to add specific semantic meaning to content specific for
                                the company.</entry>
                        </row>
                        <row>
                            <entry>Besides web-based outputs, produce PDFs with a relatively high
                                degree of control over the PDF customization.</entry>
                            <entry>Useful to produce PDFs for print or online delivery.</entry>
                            <entry>Useful to produce PDFs for print or online delivery.</entry>
                            <entry>Useful to produce PDFs for print or online delivery.</entry>
                        </row>
                    </tbody>
                </tgroup>
            </table></p>
    </body>
</topic>
