<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="topic_zxr_233_vkb">
    <title>Using Git client-side hooks to run  DITA publishing pipelines</title>
    <shortdesc>This topic describes how to use Git client-side hooks to execute DITA commands and
        publishing workflows, with a emphasis on using <xref
            href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/git-addon.html" format="html"
            scope="external">Oxygen's Git Client</xref>.</shortdesc>
    <prolog>
        <author>Alex Jitianu</author>
        <critdates>
            <created date="2020-05-01"/>
        </critdates>
    </prolog>
    <body>
        <section id="section_itq_3r4_nlb">
            <title>Prerequisites</title>
            <ol id="ol_lhp_pvs_nlb">
                <li>Oxygen's Git client is based on <xref href="https://www.eclipse.org/jgit/"
                        format="html" scope="external">JGit library</xref>. When running on Windows,
                    this library relies on <xref href="https://www.cygwin.com/" format="html"
                        scope="external">CYGWIN</xref> to run the Git hooks. <xref
                        href="https://www.cygwin.com/" format="html" scope="external">CYGWIN</xref>
                    must be installed and added to the path.</li>
                <li>If you are running on Windows, you either need an <xref
                        href="https://github.com/oxygenxml/oxygen-git-plugin/releases/download/2.0.0/git.support-2.0.0-plugin.jar"
                        format="jar" scope="external">Oxygen Git client version 2.0.0</xref> or one
                    newer than 2.1.1 (I know that at the time this post is written 2.1.1 is the
                    latest version, but soon a new one will be released). We are basically avoiding
                    versions that come bundled with JGit 5.6.0 which has this <xref
                        href="https://bugs.eclipse.org/bugs/show_bug.cgi?id=558577" format="html"
                        scope="external">known issue</xref>.<p>If you need to install version 2.0.0
                        of the plugin, since this  version is no longer available in the add-on, you
                        have to install it manually like this:<ul id="ul_kkb_1ct_nlb">
                            <li>Uninstall the current Oxygen Git client version, if one is
                                present</li>
                            <li>Download <xref
                                    href="https://github.com/oxygenxml/oxygen-git-plugin/releases/download/2.0.0/git.support-2.0.0-plugin.jar"
                                    format="html" scope="external">Oxygen Git client version
                                    2.0.0</xref></li>
                            <li>unzip it inside <filepath>{oxygenInstallDir}/plugins</filepath>.
                                Make sure you don't create any intermediate folders. The path should
                                be like this:
                                    <filepath>{oxygenInstallDir}/git.support-2.0.0/plugin.xml</filepath></li>
                        </ul></p></li>
                <li>The DITA-OT command utility needs to be added to the path so that the presented
                    script will work.</li>
            </ol>
        </section>
        <section id="section_ift_n33_vkb">
            <title>What is a Git hook</title>
            <p>Git has a way to fire off custom scripts when certain important actions occur. There
                are two groups of these hooks: <term>client-side</term> and
                <term>server-side</term>. <term>Client-side</term> hooks are triggered by operations
                such as committing and merging, while<term> server-side</term> hooks run on network
                operations such as receiving pushed commits. You can read more about what types of
                hooks are available on <xref
                    href="https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Customizing-Git-Git-Hooks" format="html"
                    scope="external">Customizing Git - Git Hooks</xref>.</p>
        </section>
        <section id="section_frm_gk3_vkb">
            <title>Using a client side hook with a DITA project</title>
            <p>The main scenario we are focusing in this topic is about using client-side hooks
                while working with DITA and storing it in a Git repository and how to enable
                Oxygen’s built-in <xref
                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/git-addon.html"
                    format="html" scope="external">Git Client </xref> to execute these hooks.</p>
        </section>
        <section id="section_sjm_nj3_vkb">
            <p>The hooks are all stored in the <codeph>hooks</codeph> subdirectory of the Git
                directory which is by default <codeph>.git/hooks</codeph>. An useful client-side
                hook is the <term>pre-commit</term> hook. It’s used to inspect the snapshot that’s
                about to be committed, to see if you’ve forgotten something, to make sure tests like
                Oxygen's <xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/oxygen_scripting.html" format="html"
                    scope="external">Validate and Check for completeness</xref> run, or to examine
                whatever you need to inspect in the code. </p>
            <p>To make it easier to follow, though, we will use a use case reported by one of
                Oxygen's users: generate a Markdown version of our documentation whenever you commit
                something. When I tried to do the same thing myself, I to encountered a number of
                challenges and I think it will help others read how I managed to solve it.</p>
        </section>
        <section id="section_jfj_nm3_vkb">
            <title>Installing a <term>pre-commit</term> hook</title>
            <p>Git automatically populates the <codeph>.git/hooks</codeph> directory with example
                scripts when you initialize a repository. All we need to do is rename<term>
                    pre-commit.sample </term>to simply <term>pre-commit</term> and put in it the
                script we are interested in.</p>
            <note>The DITA-OT command utility needs to be added to the path in order for the
                following script to work.</note>
            <p>The content of the <term>pre-commit</term> file is something like this. We assume
                that the map to publish is called <filepath>README.ditamap</filepath> and it is
                located inside the project root directory.</p>
            <p>
                <note>Oxygen's Git client is based on <xref href="https://www.eclipse.org/jgit/"
                        format="html" scope="external">JGit library</xref>. When running on Windows,
                    this library relies on <xref href="https://www.cygwin.com/" format="html"
                        scope="external">CYGWIN</xref> to run these Git scripts. <xref
                        href="https://www.cygwin.com/" format="html" scope="external">CYGWIN</xref>
                    must be installed and added to the path.</note>
            </p>
            <pre>#!/bin/sh
set -x

echo "Start hook"

export GIT_HOOKS_DIR=`cd "\`dirname "\\\`readlink "$0" || echo $0\\\`"\`" &amp;&amp; pwd`

# We assume the hooks directory is the default one: wc/.git/hooks
export ROOT_DIR="$GIT_HOOKS_DIR/../.."

 # OS specific support.  $var _must_ be set to either true or false.
cygwin=false;
case "`uname`" in
  CYGWIN*) cygwin=true ;;
esac

# For some reasons, if we let a cygwin path pass, the dita pipeline fails with:
# Error: Failed to run pipeline: [DOTA069F][FATAL] Input file 'file:/cygdrive/c/Users/.../git-hooks-sample/.git/hooks/../../README.ditamap' cannot be located or read. Ensure that file was specified properly and that you have permission to access it.
# It works if we pass it instead as: C:/Users/.../git-hooks-sample/README.ditamap
# Considering the fact that the dita script just passes the --input further on to ANT, it might have something to do with cygwin processing performed in ANT.
if $cygwin; then
  ROOT_DIR=`cygpath --mixed "$ROOT_DIR"`
fi


dita --input=$ROOT_DIR/README.ditamap --format=markdown --output=$ROOT_DIR/docs/

# Exit with status of last command
exit </pre>
            <p>The first challenge in the script above. If I don't pass the ditamap path through
                    <codeph>ROOT_DIR=`cygpath --mixed "$ROOT_DIR"`</codeph> the DITA publishing
                pipeline fails
                with:<codeblock>Error: Failed to run pipeline: [DOTA069F][FATAL] Input file 'file:/cygdrive/c/Users/.../git-hooks-sample/.git/hooks/../../README.ditamap' cannot be located or read. Ensure that file was specified properly and that you have permission to access it.</codeblock></p>
            <p>Having done that, running this hook on Windows will still fail, inside the DITA
                pipeline,
                with:<codeblock>Buildfile: \cygdrive\d\tools\dita-ot-3.4\build.xml does not exist!</codeblock></p>
            <p>To fix this, I had to go inside <filepath>{dita.ot.dir}/bin/dita</filepath> and
                search for this
                line:<pre># Add build script to arguments
ant_exec_args="$ant_exec_args \"-buildfile\" \"$DITA_HOME/build.xml\" \"-main\" \"org.dita.dost.invoker.Main\""</pre></p>
            <p>and replace it
                with:<pre>##############################################
BUILD_FILE="$DITA_HOME/build.xml"
if $cygwin ; then
BUILD_FILE=`cygpath --mixed "$BUILD_FILE"`
fi
###############################################

# Add build script to arguments
ant_exec_args="$ant_exec_args \"-buildfile\" \"$BUILD_FILE\" \"-main\" \"org.dita.dost.invoker.Main\""</pre></p>
            <p>That's it. Each time you commit something in this repository, the Markdown version of
                your documentation gets generated.</p>
        </section>
    </body>
</topic>
