<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="webhelp-dita-strong-points">
    <title>DITA WebHelp Publishing Solution strong points</title>
    <prolog>
        <author>Radu Coravu</author>
        <critdates>
            <created date="2022-02-23"/>
        </critdates>
    </prolog>
    <body>
        <p>Oxygen XML Editor's own user guide is generated from DITA XML content and published as
            WebHelp Responsive output: <xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/" format="html" scope="external"/></p>
        <p>I tried to compile below some strong points that the published WebHelp output obtained
            from DITA XML content has:<ul id="ul_qtb_1yf_rsb">
                <li>It's a pure HTML5+Javascript publishing solution without the need of any server
                    side component.</li>
                <li>The WebHelp output can be used both offline and online.</li>
                <li>Compatible with all browser vendors: <xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-webhelp-responsive/topics/wh_getting_started.html" format="html" scope="external"/></li>
                <li>Responsive layout, adjusts to screen size and can be used on a wide variety of
                    devices (mobile devices, tablets or desktops).</li>
                <li>The WebHelp layout can be fully customized: <xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-webhelp-responsive/topics/webhelp-responsive-description.html" format="html" scope="external"/>.</li>
                <li>The WebHelp publishing comes with 7-8 pre-configuref color themes but you can
                    create your own publishing templates: <xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-webhelp-responsive/topics/whr_publishing_templates.html" format="html" scope="external"/>. </li>
                <li>You can also use the free Oxygen Styles Basket web site to customize the WebHelp
                    output: <xref href="https://styles.oxygenxml.com/" format="html" scope="external"/>.</li>
                <li>Contains its own search engine implemented in Javascript (with support for AND,
                    OR, exact match, auto complete and highlights). The search engine can assign
                    various weights and priorities to various elements.<xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-webhelp-responsive/topics/whr-search-engine.html" format="html" scope="external"/></li>
                <li>Automatically generates an Index page if the DITA content contains
                        <xmlelement>index</xmlelement> elements.</li>
                <li>For each section contained inside a topic a mini table of contents is generated:
                        <xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-webhelp-responsive/topics/whr-html5-pages.html#whr-topic-page-layout__topic-topic-toc" format="html" scope="external"/>.</li>
                <li>Inner topics, sections and topics can be folded.</li>
                <li>Code block contents can be automatically syntax highlighted when publishing:
                        <xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-webhelp-responsive/topics/add-syntax-highlights-codeblocks.html" format="html" scope="external"/>.</li>
                <li>Track changes and comments made to the DITA XML content can be published as side
                    notes in the WebHelp output.<xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-webhelp-responsive/topics/webhelp-responsive-plugin-additional-parameters.html#webhelp-responsive-plugin-additional-parameters__webhelp_show_changes_and_comments" format="html" scope="external"/>.</li>
                <li>The WebHelp output comes with support for the following built-in languages:
                    English, French, German, Japanese, and Chinese. And support for additional
                    languages can be further added. It can also be used with right-to-left text
                    orientation: <xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-webhelp-responsive/topics/whr-localization.html" format="html" scope="external"/>
                </li>
                <li>It can be used for context sensitive help, called with various help IDs from an
                        application:<xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-webhelp-responsive/topics/whr-context-sensitive.html" format="html" scope="external"/>
                </li>
                <li>The WebHelp Feedback system can be integrated in every WebHelp page and provides
                    support for users to add comments and give feedback Feedback (create account,
                    post message, moderate, manage multiple versions of documentation): <xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-webhelp-responsive/topics/whr-feedback-system.html" format="html" scope="external"/></li>
                <li>You can embed Facebook, Twitter, or Google Analytics: <xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-webhelp-responsive/topics/webhelp-social-media-integration.html" format="html" scope="external"/>.</li>
                <li>WebHelp documentation can also be produced on the server side: <xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/xml_webhelp/download_oxygenxml_webhelp.html" format="html" scope="external"/></li>
                <li>The WebHelp output was tested for Accessibility problems, it works well with a
                    screen narrator and one of the WebHelp color themes is fully 508 compliant for
                    people with reduced vision: <xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-webhelp-responsive/topics/whr-accessibility.html" format="html" scope="external"/></li>
            </ul></p>
        <p>Some past webinars may help further people who want to customize the WebHelp output:<ul
                id="ul_ubm_tbg_rsb">
                <li><xref
                        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/events/2022/webinar_techniques_for_customizing_the_webhelp_responsive_output.html"
                        format="html" scope="external">Techniques for Customizing the WebHelp
                        Responsive Output</xref></li>
                <li><xref
                        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/events/2022/webinar_documentation_review_workflow_using_oxygen_feedback.html"
                        format="html" scope="external">Documentation Review Workflow Using Oxygen
                        Feedback</xref></li>
                <li><xref
                        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/events/2021/webinar_dita_publishing_and_feedback_with_oxygen_tools.html"
                        format="html" scope="external">DITA Publishing and Feedback with Oxygen
                        Tools</xref></li>
            </ul></p>
    </body>
</topic>
