<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="welcome">
    <title>Welcome to the <ph keyref="oxygen"/> Blog !</title>
    <prolog>
        <author>Radu Coravu</author>
        <copyright>
            <copyryear year="2020"/>
            <copyrholder>Syncro Soft</copyrholder>
        </copyright>
        <critdates>
            <created date="2020-01-14"/>
        </critdates>
    </prolog>
    <body>
        <p>Our blog contains various useful articles and tutorials covering various aspects of
            editing, developing, and publishing using <ph keyref="oxygen"/> with various XML
            technologies. </p>
        <p>Sometimes (quite often actually) articles originally written for the blog are curated by
            our technical writers and end up being part of our official documentation: <xref
                href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/" format="html" scope="external"/>.
            However, the blog allows us to deploy various small articles faster, without the need to
            wait for documentation updates.</p>
        <section id="section_fqq_tr3_jkb">
            <title>History of the <ph keyref="oxygen"/> Blog</title>
            <p>The blog was originally hosted by <xref href="https://aboutxml.blogspot.com"
                    format="html" scope="external">Google Blogs</xref> and the first articles on the
                blog appeared around 2007. Since Google Blogs did not allow enough flexibility in
                creating the published content (for example, the inability to create a table of
                contents) the blog was migrated to XML content and is now hosted on the Netlify
                platform: <xref href="https://oxygenxmlblog.netlify.com/" format="html"
                    scope="external"/>.</p>
        </section>
        <section id="section_pv2_1q3_jkb">
            <title>How the <ph keyref="oxygen"/> Blog Works</title>
            <p>The entire source code of the <ph keyref="oxygen"/> blog is stored in DITA content on
                a public GitHub repository: <xref href="https://github.com/oxygenxml/blog"
                    format="html" scope="external"/>.</p>
            <p>There is a <xref
                    href="https://github.com/oxygenxml/blog/blob/master/build/build.gradle"
                    format="html" scope="external">Gradle build file</xref> that uses a special DITA
                Open Toolkit to produce <xref
                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/whr_generate_output.html"
                    format="html" scope="external">WebHelp Responsive</xref>, EPUB and PDF outputs
                from the DITA content. The following features are available in the published output:
                    <ul id="ul_ayd_kr3_jkb">
                    <li>Color themes can be easily changed with CSS to modify how the output
                        looks.</li>
                    <li>Search functionality. Possibility to add index terms.</li>
                    <li>RSS Feed is automatically generated from the entire list of topics.</li>
                    <li>PDF output is automatically generated using Oxygen Chemistry Engine and can
                        be customized with CSS.</li>
                    <li>EPUB output is automatically generated using DITA For Publishers
                        plugins.</li>
                    <li>Each page has an <b>Edit online</b> link allowing it to be edited in the
                        Oxygen XML Web Author.</li>
                    <li>Each page has a comments section build using the <xref
                            href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/oxygen_feedback.html" format="html"
                            scope="external">Oxygen Feedback</xref> platform.</li>
                    <li>Each time content is added to the project there is a <xref
                            href="https://github.com/oxygenxml/blog/actions" format="html"
                            scope="external">configured GitHub action</xref> which runs a validation
                        report of the DITA content (reporting for example broken links).</li>
                </ul></p>
        </section>
        <section id="section_tnr_rr3_jkb">
            <title>How You can Contribute to the <ph keyref="oxygen"/> Blog.</title>
            <p>We want to encourage our end users and collaborators to start creating small
                Oxygen-related articles for our blog. To post your own articles, follow these
                steps:</p>
            <ol id="ol_o1c_cs3_jkb">
                <li>Create your own <xref href="https://github.com/" format="html" scope="external"
                        >GitHub</xref> account, if you do not already have one.</li>
                <li>Fork the contents of the <ph keyref="oxygen"/> GitHub project in your own GitHub
                    Repository: <xref href="https://github.com/oxygenxml/blog" format="html"
                        scope="external"/>.</li>
                <li>Make changes to your forked project or to a branch from it. <ul
                        id="ul_gkd_4s3_jkb">
                        <li>If you have the <ph keyref="oxygen"/> application installed, you can
                            download our <xref href="https://github.com/oxygenxml/oxygen-git-plugin"
                                format="html" scope="external">Git add-on</xref> that should allow
                            you to clone the fork, make changes, and then commit and push them to
                            your repository.</li>
                        <li>As an alternative, you can use the Oxygen XML Web Author browser editing
                            tool that has its own Git connector: <xref
                                href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/oxygen-xml-web-author/app/oxygen.html"
                                format="html" scope="external"/>.</li>
                        <li>Please remember to add the name of the author and the created date for
                            the topic in the DITA topic prolog section
                            like:<codeblock outputclass="language-xml">&lt;prolog>
    &lt;author>Radu Coravu&lt;/author>
    &lt;critdates>
        &lt;created date="2020-01-14"/>
    &lt;/critdates>
&lt;/prolog></codeblock>This
                            prolog section will be used to add in the published HTML output the
                            author information after the topic title.</li>
                    </ul></li>
                <li>After all changes have been made to your fork of the project, you can create a
                    pull request to the <ph keyref="oxygen"/> original GitHub project.</li>
                <li>We will review your changes and if your pull requests is accepted, the blog web
                    site will be automatically updated with the new changes.</li>
            </ol>
        </section>
        <section id="section_cbc_g11_qkb">
            <title>Technologies Used to Store, Build and Publish the Oxygen XML Blog</title>
            <ul id="ul_wdy_h11_qkb">
                <li>The blog content is stored on a public <xref
                        href="https://github.com/oxygenxml/blog" format="html" scope="external"
                        >GitHub</xref> repository. </li>
                <li><xref href="https://github.com/oxygenxml/blog/issues" format="html"
                        scope="external">GitHub's issues list</xref> is used to organize the work
                    and add new improvement ideas.</li>
                <li>Offline editing the blog is done using <xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/"
                        format="html" scope="external">Oxygen XML Editor</xref> with its Git add-on
                    installed.</li>
                <li>Online editing is done using <xref
                        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/xml_web_author.html" format="html"
                        scope="external">Oxygen Web Author</xref>.</li>
                <li>A <xref href="https://github.com/oxygenxml/blog/blob/master/build/build.gradle"
                        format="html" scope="external">Gradle build file</xref> is used to download
                    a custom DITA Open Toolkit which contains the Oxygen WebHelp Responsive and PDF
                    CSS plugins pre-installed, then run the publishing and validation stages.</li>
                <li>The <xref href="https://www.dita-ot.org/" format="html" scope="external">DITA
                        Open Toolkit</xref> is used along with custom plugins to publish the DITA
                        content.<ul id="ul_ekl_2b1_qkb">
                        <li><xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/xml_editor/webhelp.html"
                                format="html" scope="external">Oxygen WebHelp</xref> is used to
                            publish the DITA content to HTML output. Publishing templates are used
                            to customize the published output.</li>
                        <li>The <xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/oxygen_feedback.html"
                                format="html" scope="external">Oxygen Feedback system</xref> is used
                            for adding feedback forms to each page.</li>
                        <li><xref
                                href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/chemistry-html-to-pdf-converter.html"
                                format="html" scope="external">Oxygen PDF Chemistry</xref> is used
                            to produce PDF for the publishing platform.</li>
                        <li>The <xref href="https://www.dita4publishers.org/" format="html"
                                scope="external">DITA For Publishers</xref> plugins are used to
                            produce the EPUB output.</li>
                    </ul></li>
                <li> Oxygen DITA <xref
                        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-editor/topics/dita-map-validate.html"
                        format="html" scope="external">Validate and Check for Completeness</xref> is
                    run as a GitHub action with the help of a <xref
                        href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/oxygen_scripting.html" format="html"
                        scope="external">special scripting license</xref>.</li>
                <li><xref href="https://www.netlify.com/" format="html" scope="external"
                        >Netlify</xref> is used to connect to the repository, run Gradle and publish
                    the WebSite.</li>
            </ul>
        </section>
    </body>
</topic>
