<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="advantages_and_disadvantages_of_using_git">
    <title>Advantages/Disadvantages of using Git</title>
	<prolog>
		<author>Radu Coravu</author>
		<critdates>
			<created date="2023-03-01"/>
		</critdates>
	</prolog>
    <body>
		<section id="section_d5p_wxr_lwb">
			<title>Advantages of using Git</title>
			<ul id="ul_dvl_hyr_lwb">
				<li>Present in most companies, knowing Git is in my opinion a nice asset to have for
					any technical documentation writer in their CV.</li>
				<li>Free and stable system, used by many, with relative few bugs, with available
					tutorials, documentation, with easy access to people who might help with Git
					related questions. </li>
				<li>Version control:<ul id="ul_xcq_hyr_lwb">
						<li>History of changes made to a project.</li>
						<li>Ability to revert to previous changes and to see who made certain
							changes.</li>
					</ul></li>
				<li>Collaborate on the same project with support to:<ul id="ul_utr_xzr_lwb">
						<li>Check out.</li>
						<li>Update.</li>
						<li>Commit/Revert changes.</li>
						<li>Resolve conflicts.</li>
					</ul></li>
				<li>Support for branching (branches used for versioning the documentation or for
					working on larger fixes) and for merging between branches.</li>
				<li>Support to work on your own repository even with offline access and then to
					merge changes in the remote repository when online connection is available.</li>
				<li>Collaborate with other teams in the same company on projects, either by having
					the documentation as part of the larger Git repository of the product, or by
					allowing developers who know Git to contribute reviews.</li>
				<li>Support to create pull requests for people who might not have write access or
					want to have their work reviewed.</li>
			</ul>
		</section>
		<section id="section_vkn_zzr_lwb">
			<title>Disadvantages of Using Git</title>
			<ul id="ul_hk5_b1s_lwb">
				<li>No built-in support for a ticketing system. <note id="note_b4n_421_rwb"
						type="tip">This support is added on the side either by using a commercial
						ticketing system like JIRA or by using GitHub or GitLab which have their own
						basic ways of adding and closing issues.</note></li>
				<li>No built-in support for publishing. <note id="note_ch3_p21_rwb" type="tip"
						>Publishing pipelines need to be separately built.</note></li>
				<li>No way to lock resources when editing in order to avoid conflicts.<note
						id="note_egd_q21_rwb" type="tip">But there are ways to easily resolve most
						conflicts.</note></li>
				<li>Mistakes can be made when using Git. <note id="note_fhr_r21_rwb" type="tip"
						>Usually mistakes made which break the Git history or project structure can
						be reverted, or you can check out the entire project again.</note></li>
				<li>Some training is required to use and understand the branching and history models
					in Git. <note id="note_gng_s21_rwb" type="tip">Such training tutorials and
						courses are readily available.</note></li>
				<li>No granular support for user roles. Users usually either have full read-write
					access to a repository or only read access.<note id="note_m5p_jf1_rwb"
						type="tip">When using GitHub or GitLab, users with read only access to a
						repository can still create pull requests with the changes they want to
						incorporate in the main repository.</note></li>
			</ul>
		</section>
	</body>
	<related-links>
		<link href="https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/why-git" format="html" scope="external"
		/>
	</related-links>
</topic>
