<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="advantages_and_disadvantages_of_using_git">
    <title>Advantages of using Git</title>
	<prolog>
		<author>Radu Coravu</author>
	</prolog>
    <body>
    	<ul id="ul_dvl_hyr_lwb">
    		<li>Git as a version control system is present in most software development companies. Knowing
    			Git is in my opinion a nice asset to have for any technical documentation writer
    			in their CV.</li>
    		<li>Free and stable system, used by many, with relative few bugs, with available
    			tutorials, documentation, with easy access to people who might help with Git
    			related questions. </li>
    		<li>Version control:<ul id="ul_xcq_hyr_lwb">
    			<li>History of changes made to a project.</li>
    			<li>Ability to revert to previous changes and to see who made certain
    				changes.</li>
    		</ul></li>
    		<li>Collaborate on the same project with support to:<ul id="ul_utr_xzr_lwb">
    			<li>Check out.</li>
    			<li>Update.</li>
    			<li>Commit/Revert changes.</li>
    			<li>Resolve conflicts.</li>
    		</ul></li>
    		<li>Support for branching (branches used for versioning the documentation or for working on
    			larger features) and for merging between branches.</li>
    		<li>Support to work on your own repository even with offline access and then to merge changes in
    			the remote repository when the online connection is available.</li>
    		<li>Collaborate with other teams in the same company on projects, either by having
    			the documentation as part of the larger Git repository of the product, or by
    			allowing developers who know Git to contribute reviews.</li>
    		<li>Support to create pull requests for people who might not have write access or
    			want to have their work reviewed.</li>
    	</ul>
	</body>
	<related-links>
		<link href="https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/why-git" format="html" scope="external"
		/>
	</related-links>
</topic>
