<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="common_workflows">
    <title>Common Workflows</title>
	<prolog>
		<author>Radu Coravu</author>
		<critdates>
			<created date="2023-02-13"/>
		</critdates>
	</prolog>
    <body>
        <p>Common workflows for working with Git.</p>
		<section id="section_hmq_2zl_mwb">
			<title>All on one branch (all in one boat)</title>
			<p>We all work with the same project(s) on the same branch. We have separate branches
				which mark past releases. For features which may take a longer time to implement, we
				connect them to the live content when they are done.</p>
			<p>Common workflow:<ul id="ul_t13_zbm_mwb">
					<li>Check in the project (one time operation).</li>
					<li>Pull to get changes from the main repository.</li>
					<li>Commit and push changes.</li>
					<li>Deal with possible conflicts which may appear.</li>
					<li>Request review either before commit or after the change was incorporated in
						the main branch.</li>
				</ul></p>
			<p>Workflow for updating documentation for a past release:<ul id="ul_erq_fcm_mwb">
					<li>Switch to branch specific for that release.</li>
					<li>Pull to get changes from the main repository.</li>
					<li>Commit and push changes.</li>
					<li>Deal with possible conflicts which may appear.</li>
				</ul></p>
		</section>
		<section id="section_fgh_kcm_mwb">
			<title>Feature Branches</title>
			<ul id="ul_jzw_tcm_mwb">
				<li>Create a branch on which you work on a larger feature either by yourself or with
					some other colleagues. </li>
				<li>You can also request review on the branch. </li>
				<li>When finished, merge the branch in the main repository branch or create a pull
					request to merge the branch.</li>
			</ul>
			<p>Useful links:<ul id="ul_iv5_v3m_mwb">
					<li><xref
							href="https://betterprogramming.pub/solution-architecture-docs-as-code-366a7b40f9e5"
							format="html" scope="external"/></li>
				</ul></p>
		</section>
		<section id="section_pzq_w3m_mwb">
			<title>Work Tips</title>
			<p>
				<dl id="dl_u1b_z3m_mwb">
					<dlentry>
						<dt>Micro Commits</dt>
						<dd>Commit often, whenever a small change makes sense by itself. Useful
							links: <xref
								href="https://stackoverflow.blog/2022/12/19/use-git-tactically/"
								format="html" scope="external"/></dd>
					</dlentry>
					<dlentry>
						<dt>Pull Requests</dt>
						<dd>Instead of merging your feature branch directly in the main branch,
							create a pull request to allow a colleague to review and integrate the
							change.</dd>
					</dlentry>
				</dl>
			</p>
		</section>
    </body>
</topic>
