<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="git_client_applications">
    <title>Applications for Working with Git</title>
	<prolog>
		<author>Radu Coravu</author>
	</prolog>
    <body>
		<section id="section_gxh_vpv_v2c">
			<title>Oxygen Applications</title>
			<p>
				<ul id="ul_v3t_mcs_lwx">
					<li><xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/content_fusion.html" format="html"
							scope="external"><b>Oxygen Content Fusion</b></xref> is a <b>web-based
							Git-enabled DITA CMS</b>. It is designed to provide the missing pieces
						that Git lacks when working with a DITA project, such as review workflows
						and publishing.</li>
					<li><xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/doc/ug-addons/topics/git-addon.html"
							format="html" scope="external"><b>Git Client</b></xref> add-on in Oxygen
						XML Editor allows you to use Git from the comfort of your authoring
						tool.</li>
					<li><xref href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/xml_web_author.html" format="html"
							scope="external"><b>Oxygen XML Web Author</b></xref> has support for all
						Git hosting servers. It is customisable and can be integrated with your
						workflows and tools, such as <xref
							href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/demo/wa_web_author_into_your_documentation_review_workflow.html"
							format="html" scope="external">JIRA issue tracking</xref>.</li>
				</ul>
			</p>
		</section>
		<section id="section_ozj_tzy_qwb">
			<title>Repository hosting solutions</title>
			<p>
				<ul id="ul_gjw_5tl_mwb">
					<li><xref href="https://github.com/" format="html" scope="external"
							>GitHub</xref> (either online or on-premise).</li>
					<li><xref href="https://about.gitlab.com/" format="html" scope="external"
							>GitLab</xref> (either online or on-premise).</li>
				</ul>
			</p>
			<p>Both of these solutions come with:<ul id="ul_yxv_ztl_mwb">
					<li>Support for creating and managing private/public repositories.</li>
					<li>Basic support for creating and handling tickets/issues.</li>
					<li>Support for creating pull/merge requests.</li>
				</ul></p>
		</section>
		<section id="section_jrl_5zy_qwb">
			<title>Other client-side applications</title>
			<p>There are lots of free client-side applications that can be used to work with Git
				repositories:</p>
			<ul id="ul_v3t_mcs_lwb">
				<li><b>Git Fork</b></li>
				<li><b>Git Tower</b></li>
				<li><b>SourceTree</b></li>
				<li><b>GitHub Desktop</b>
					<ul id="ul_nlw_lrv_v2c">
						<li>Allows you to cherry-pick commits with drag &amp; drop, but otherwise
							has limited functionality</li>
					</ul></li>
				<li>The <codeph>git</codeph> command-line client<ul id="ul_adf_mrv_v2c">
						<li>Useful for scripting or advanced commands</li>
					</ul></li>
			</ul>
		</section>
	</body>
</topic>
