<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="topic_z5n_nph_4fcd">
    <title>Speed Up Oxygen XML Web Author Customization (use Web Author Test Server Add-on)</title>
   <prolog>
    <author>Mihaela Calotescu</author>
    <critdates>
        <created date="2025-06-05"/>
    </critdates>
    </prolog>
    <body>
        <p>Are you working on any of these tasks:</p>
        <ul id="ul_chr_xq3_4fc">
            <li>
                <p>Starting a new Oxygen XML Web Author customization project?</p>
            </li>
            <li>
                <p>Testing if an existing Oxygen XML Editor framework works with Web Author?</p>
            </li>
            <li>
                <p>Making quick updates to a framework already used in a production Web Author
                    server?</p>
            </li>
        </ul>
        <p>The <b>Web Author Test Server Add-on</b> is designed to make your work easier and
            faster.</p>
        <p>This <b>Oxygen XML Editor add-on </b>lets you quickly preview and edit XML documents in a
            local <b>Web Author Test Server</b>. It uses the same framework you are working on. You
            do not need to package, deploy, or do any extra setup.</p>
        <p>Once installed, you'll see a new button in the toolbar, called <b>Start Web Author
                Server</b> that:</p>
        <ul id="ul_lmy_vph_4fc">
            <li>
                <p>Launches a local Web Author Test Server automatically.</p>
            </li>
            <li>
                <p>Opens your current document in it.</p>
            </li>
            <li>
                <p>Loads the associated framework instantly.</p>
            </li>
        </ul>
        <p>Watch this video for more details about how to install it and to see how efficient your
            customization workflow can become when you will use it:</p>
	<p><object width="560" height="315"
      data="https://www.youtube.com/embed/u3WhXzxdc28" outputclass="iframe">
<param name="allowfullscreen" />
</object></p>
        <p>
            <note id="note_gmg_mt3_4fc">The update site shown in the video, that you can use to
                install the add-on, is: <xref
                    href="https://www.oxygenxml.com/InstData/Addons/optional/updateSite.xml"
                    format="html" scope="external"/></note>
        </p>
    </body>
</topic>
